
Milk and Dairy Products  What better subject for the first chapter than the food with which we all begin our  lives? Humans are mammals, a word that means “creatures of the breast,” and the  first food that any mammal tastes is milk. Milk is food for the beginning eater, a  gulpable essence distilled by the mother from her own more variable and  challenging diet. When our ancestors took up dairying, they adopted the cow, the  ewe, and the goat as surrogate mothers. These creatures accomplish the miracle of  turning meadow and straw into buckets of human nourishment. And their milk  turned out to be an elemental fluid rich in possibility, just a step or two away from  luxurious cream, fragrant golden butter, and a multitude of flavorful foods  concocted by friendly microbes.  No wonder that milk captured the imaginations of many cultures. The ancient  Indo-Europeans were cattle herders who moved out from the Caucasian steppes to  settle vast areas of Eurasia around 3000   BCE ; and milk and butter are prominent in  the creation myths of their descendents, from India to Scandinavia. Peoples of the  Mediterranean and Middle East relied on the oil of their olive tree rather than  butter, but milk and cheese still figure in the Old Testament as symbols of  abundance and creation.  The modern imagination holds a very different view of milk! Mass production  turned it and its products from precious, marvelous resources into ordinary  commodities,   and   medical   science   stigmatized   them   for   their   fat   content.  Fortunately a more balanced view of dietary fat is developing; and traditional  versions of dairy foods survive. It’s still possible to savor the remarkable foods that  millennia of human ingenuity have teased from milk. A sip of milk itself or a scoop  of ice cream can be a Proustian draft of youth’s innocence and energy and  possibility, while a morsel of fine cheese is a rich meditation on maturity, the  fulfillment of possibility, the way of all flesh.
Milk and Butter: Primal Fluids  When the gods performed the sacrifice, with the first Man as the  offering, spring was the melted butter, summer the fuel, autumn the  offering. They anointed that Man, born at the beginning, as a sacrifice  on the straw…. From that full sacrifice they gathered the grains of  butter, and made it into the creatures of the air, the forest, and the  village…cattle were born from it, and sheep and goats were born from  it.  — The   Rg Veda,   Book 10, ca. 1200   BCE  …I am come down to deliver [my people] out of the hands of the  Egyptians, and to bring them up out of that land unto a good land and  a large, unto a land flowing with milk and honey….  — God to Moses on Mount Horeb (Exodus 3:8)  Hast thou not poured me out as milk, and curdled me like cheese?  — Job to God (Job 10:10)  Mammals and Milk  The Evolution of Milk  How and why did such a thing as milk ever come to be? It came along with warm-  bloodedness, hair, and skin glands, all of which distinguish mammals from reptiles.  Milk may have begun around 300 million years ago as a protective and nourishing  skin secretion for hatchlings being incubated on their mother’s skin, as is true for  the platypus today. Once it evolved, milk contributed to the success of the  mammalian family. It gives newborn animals the advantage of ideally formulated  food from the mother even after birth, and therefore the opportunity to continue  their physical development outside the womb. The human species has taken full  advantage of this opportunity: we are completely helpless for months after birth,  while our brains finish growing to a size that would be difficult to accommodate in  the womb and birth canal. In this sense, milk helped make possible the evolution
of our large brain, and so helped make us the unusual animals we are.  The Rise of the Ruminants  All mammals produce milk for their young, but only a closely related handful have  been exploited by humans. Cattle, water buffalo, sheep, goats, camels, yaks: these  suppliers of plenty were created by a scarcity of food. Around 30 million years ago,  the earth’s warm, moist climate became seasonally arid. This shift favored plants  that could grow quickly and produce seeds to survive the dry period, and caused a  great expansion of grasslands, which in the dry seasons became a sea of  desiccated, fibrous stalks and leaves. So began the gradual decline of the horses  and the expansion of the deer family, the   ruminants,   which evolved the ability to  survive on dry grass. Cattle, sheep, goats, and their relatives are all ruminants.  The key to the rise of the ruminants is their highly specialized, multichamber  stomach, which accounts for a fifth of their body weight and houses trillions of  fiber-digesting microbes, most of them in the first chamber, or   rumen.   Their unique  plumbing, together with the habit of regurgitating and rechewing partly digested  food, allows ruminants to extract nourishment from high-fiber, poor-quality plant  material. Ruminants produce milk copiously on feed that is otherwise useless to  humans and that can be stockpiled as straw or silage. Without them there would  be no dairying.  Dairy Animals of the World  Only a small handful of animal species contributes significantly to the world’s milk  supply.  The Cow, European and Indian   The immediate ancestor of   Bos taurus,   the  common dairy cow, was   Bos primigenius,   the long-horned wild aurochs. This  massive animal, standing 6 ft/180 cm at the shoulder and with horns 6.5 in/17 cm  in diameter, roamed Asia, Europe, and North Africa in the form of two overlapping  races: a humpless European-African form, and a humped central Asian form, the  zebu. The European race was domesticated in the Middle East around 8000   BCE , the  heat- and parasite-tolerant zebu in south-central Asia around the same time, and  an African variant of the European race in the Sahara, probably somewhat later.  In its principal homeland, central and south India, the zebu has been valued as
much for its muscle power as its milk, and remains rangy and long-horned. The  European dairy cow has been highly selected for milk production at least since  3000   BCE , when confinement to stalls in urban Mesopotamia and poor winter feed  led to a reduction in body and horn size. To this day, the prized dairy breeds —  Jerseys, Guernseys, Brown Swiss, Holsteins — are short-horned cattle that put their  energy into making milk rather than muscle and bone. The modern zebu is not as  copious a producer as the European breeds, but its milk is 25% richer in butterfat.  The Buffalo   The water buffalo is relatively unfamiliar in the West but the most  important bovine in tropical Asia.   Bubalus bubalis   was domesticated as a draft  animal in Mesopotamia around 3000   BCE , then taken to the Indus civilizations of  present-day Pakistan, and eventually through India and China. This tropical animal  is sensitive to heat (it wallows in water to cool down), so it proved adaptable to  milder climates. The Arabs brought buffalo to the Middle East around 700   CE , and in  the Middle Ages they were introduced throughout Europe. The most notable  vestige of that introduction is a population approaching 100,000 in the Campagna  region south of Rome, which supplies the milk for true mozzarella cheese,  mozzarella di bufala.   Buffalo milk is much richer than cow’s milk, so mozzarella and  Indian milk dishes are very different when the traditional buffalo milk is replaced  with cow’s milk.  The Yak   The third important dairy bovine is the yak,   Bos grunniens.   This long-  haired, bushy-tailed cousin of the common cow is beautifully adapted to the thin,  cold, dry air and sparse vegetation of the Tibetan plateau and mountains of central  Asia. It was domesticated around the same time as lowland cattle. Yak milk is  substantially richer in fat and protein than cow milk. Tibetans in particular make  elaborate use of yak butter and various fermented products.  The Goat   The goat and sheep belong to the “ovicaprid” branch of the ruminant  family, smaller animals that are especially at home in mountainous country. The  goat,   Capra hircus,   comes from a denizen of the mountains and semidesert regions  of central Asia, and was probably the first animal after the dog to be domesticated,  between 8000 and 9000   BCE   in present-day Iran and Iraq. It is the hardiest of the  Eurasian dairy animals, and will browse just about any sort of vegetation, including  woody scrub. Its omnivorous nature, small size, and good yield of distinctively  flavored milk — the highest of any dairy animal for its body weight — have made  it a versatile milk and meat animal in marginal agricultural areas.
The Sheep   The sheep,   Ovis aries,   was domesticated in the same region and period  as its close cousin the goat, and came to be valued and bred for meat, milk, wool,  and fat. Sheep were originally grazers on grassy foothills and are somewhat more  fastidious than goats, but less so than cattle. Sheep’s milk is as rich as the buffalo’s  in fat, and even richer in protein; it has long been valued in the Eastern  Mediterranean for making yogurt and feta cheese, and elsewhere in Europe for  such cheeses as Roquefort and pecorino.  The Camel   The camel family is fairly far removed from both the bovids and  ovicaprids, and may have developed the habit of rumination independently during  its early evolution in North America. Camels are well adapted to arid climates, and  were domesticated around 2500   BCE   in central Asia, primarily as pack animals. Their  milk, which is roughly comparable to cow’s milk, is collected in many countries,  and in northeast Africa is a staple food.  The Origins of Dairying  When and why did humans extend our biological heritage as milk drinkers to the  cultural practice of drinking the milk of   other   animals? Archaeological evidence  suggests that sheep and goats were domesticated in the grasslands and open  forest of present-day Iran and Iraq between 8000 and 9000   BCE , a thousand years  before the far larger, fiercer cattle. At first these animals would have been kept for  meat and skins, but the discovery of milking was a significant advance. Dairy  animals could produce the nutritional equivalent of a slaughtered meat animal or  more each year for several years, and in manageable daily increments. Dairying is  the most efficient means of obtaining nourishment from uncultivated land, and  may have been especially important as farming communities spread outward from  Southwest Asia.  Small ruminants and then cattle were almost surely first milked into containers  fashioned from skins or animal stomachs. The earliest hard evidence of dairying to  date consists of clay sieves, which have been found in the settlements of the  earliest northern European farmers, from around 5000   BCE . Rock drawings of  milking scenes were made a thousand years later in the Sahara, and what appear  to be the remains of cheese have been found in Egyptian tombs of 2300   BCE .
Diverse Traditions  Early shepherds would have discovered the major transformations of milk in their  first containers. When milk is left to stand, fat-enriched cream naturally forms at  the top, and if agitated, the cream becomes butter. The remaining milk naturally  turns acid and curdles into thick yogurt, which draining separates into solid curd  and liquid whey. Salting the fresh curd produces a simple, long-keeping cheese. As  dairyers became more adept and harvested greater quantities of milk, they found  new ways to concentrate and preserve its nourishment, and developed distinctive  dairy products in the different climatic regions of the Old World.  In arid southwest Asia, goat and sheep milk was lightly fermented into yogurt that  could be kept for several days, sun-dried, or kept under oil; or curdled into cheese  that could be eaten fresh or preserved by drying or brining. Lacking the settled life  that makes it possible to brew beer from grain or wine from grapes, the nomadic  Tartars even fermented mare’s milk into lightly alcoholic   koumiss,   which Marco Polo  described as having “the qualities and flavor of white wine.” In the high country of  Mongolia and Tibet, cow, camel, and yak milk was churned to butter for use as a  high-energy staple food.  In semitropical India, most zebu and buffalo milk was allowed to sour overnight  into a yogurt, then churned to yield buttermilk and butter, which when clarified  into   ghee   (p. 37) would keep for months. Some milk was repeatedly boiled to keep  it sweet, and then preserved not with salt, but by the combination of sugar and  long, dehydrating cooking (see box, p. 26).  The Mediterranean world of Greece and Rome used economical olive oil rather  than butter, but esteemed cheese. The Roman Pliny praised cheeses from distant  provinces that are now parts of France and Switzerland. And indeed cheese  making reached its zenith in continental and northern Europe, thanks to abundant  pastureland ideal for cattle, and a temperate climate that allowed long, gradual  fermentations.  The one major region of the Old World not to embrace dairying was China,  perhaps because Chinese agriculture began where the natural vegetation runs to  often toxic relatives of wormwood and epazote rather than ruminant-friendly  grasses. Even so, frequent contact with central Asian nomads introduced a variety  of dairy products to China, whose elite long enjoyed yogurt, koumiss, butter, acid-  set curds, and, around 1300 and thanks to the Mongols, even milk in their tea!
Dairying was unknown in the New World. On his second voyage in 1493, Columbus  brought sheep, goats, and the first of the Spanish longhorn cattle that would  proliferate in Mexico and Texas.  Milk in Europe and America: From Farmhouse to Factory  Preindustrial Europe   In Europe, dairying took hold on land that supported  abundant pasturage but was less suited to the cultivation of wheat and other  grains: wet Dutch lowlands, the heavy soils of western France and its high, rocky  central massif, the cool, moist British Isles and Scandinavia, alpine valleys in  Switzerland and Austria. With time, livestock were selected for the climate and  needs of different regions, and diversified into hundreds of distinctive local breeds  (the rugged Brown Swiss cow for cheesemaking in the mountains, the diminutive  Jersey and Guernsey for making butter in the Channel Islands). Summer milk was  preserved in equally distinctive local cheeses. By medieval times, fame had come  to French Roquefort and Brie, Swiss Appenzeller, and Italian Parmesan. In the  Renaissance, the Low Countries were renowned for their butter and exported their  productive Friesian cattle throughout Europe.  Until industrial times, dairying was done on the farm, and in many countries  mainly by women, who milked the animals in early morning and after noon and  then worked for hours to churn butter or make cheese. Country people could  enjoy good fresh milk, but in the cities, with confined cattle fed inadequately on  spent   brewers’   grain,   most   people   saw   only   watered-down,   adulterated,  contaminated milk hauled in open containers through the streets. Tainted milk was  a major cause of child mortality in early Victorian times.  Industrial and Scientific Innovations   Beginning around 1830, industrialization  transformed European and American dairying. The railroads made it possible to  get fresh country milk to the cities, where rising urban populations and incomes  fueled demand, and new laws regulated milk quality. Steam-powered farm  machinery meant that cattle could be bred and raised for milk production alone,  not for a compromise between milk and hauling, so milk production boomed, and  more than ever was drunk fresh. With the invention of machines for milking, cream  separation, and churning, dairying gradually moved out the hands of milkmaids  and   off   the   farms,   which   increasingly   supplied   milk   to   factories   for   mass  production of cream, butter, and cheese.
From the end of the 19th century, chemical and biological innovations have  helped make dairy products at once more hygienic, more predictable, and more  uniform. The great   French   chemist   Louis Pasteur   inspired two fundamental  changes in dairy practice:   pasteurization,   the pathogen-killing heat treatment that  bears his name; and the use of standard, purified microbial cultures to make  cheeses and other fermented foods. Most traditional cattle breeds have been  abandoned in favor of high-yielding black-and-white Friesian (Holstein) cows,  which now account for 90% of all American dairy cattle and 85% of British. The  cows are farmed in ever larger herds and fed an optimized diet that seldom  includes fresh pasturage, so most modern milk lacks the color, flavor, and seasonal  variation of preindustrial milk.  Dairy Products Today   Today dairying is split into several big businesses with  nothing of the dairymaid left about them. Butter and cheese, once prized, delicate  concentrates   of   milk’s   goodness,   have   become   inexpensive,   mass-produced,  uninspiring commodities piling up in government warehouses. Manufacturers  now remove much of what makes milk, cheese, ice cream, and butter distinctive  and pleasurable: they remove milk fat, which suddenly became undesirable when  medical scientists found that saturated milk fat tends to raise blood cholesterol  levels and can contribute to heart disease. Happily the last few years have brought  a correction in the view of saturated fat, a reaction to the juggernaut of mass  production, and a resurgent interest in full-flavored dairy products crafted on a  small scale from traditional breeds that graze seasonally on green pastures.  Milk and Health  Milk has long been synonymous with wholesome, fundamental nutrition, and for  good reason: unlike most of our foods, it is actually designed to be a food. As the  sole sustaining food of the calf at the beginning of its life, it’s a rich source of many  essential body-building nutrients, particularly protein, sugars and fat, vitamin A,  the B vitamins, and calcium.  Over the last few decades, however, the idealized portrait of milk has become  more shaded. We’ve learned that the balance of nutrients in cow’s milk doesn’t  meet the needs of human infants, that most adult humans on the planet can’t  digest the milk sugar called lactose, that the best route to calcium balance may not  be massive milk intake. These complications help remind us that milk was
designed to be a food for the young and rapidly growing calf, not for the young or  mature human.  Food Words:   Milk   and   Dairy  In their roots, both   milk   and   dairy   recall the physical effort it once took to  obtain milk and transform it by hand.   Milk   comes from an Indo-European root  that meant both “milk” and “to rub off,” the connection perhaps being the  stroking necessary to squeeze milk from the teat. In medieval times,   dairy   was  originally   dey-ery,   meaning the room in which the   dey,   or woman servant,  made milk into butter and cheese.   Dey   in turn came from a root meaning “to  knead bread” ( lady   shares this root) — perhaps a reflection not only of the  servant’s several duties, but also of the kneading required to squeeze  buttermilk out of butter (p. 34) and sometimes the whey out of cheese.  Milk Nutrients  Nearly all milks contain the same battery of nutrients, the relative proportions of  which vary greatly from species to species. Generally, animals that grow rapidly are  fed with milk high in protein and minerals. A calf doubles its weight at birth in 50  days, a human infant in 100; sure enough, cow’s milk contains more than double  the protein and minerals of mother’s milk. Of the major nutrients, ruminant milk is  seriously lacking only in iron and in vitamin C. Thanks to the rumen microbes,  which convert the unsaturated fatty acids of grass and grain into saturated fatty  acids, the milk fat of ruminant animals is the most highly saturated of our common  foods. Only coconut oil beats it. Saturated fat does raise blood cholesterol levels,  and high blood cholesterol is associated with an increased risk of heart disease;  but the other foods in a balanced diet can compensate for this disadvantage (p.  253).  The box below shows the nutrient contents of both familiar and unfamiliar milks.  These figures are only a rough guide, as the breakdown by breed indicates; there’s  also much variation from animal to animal, and in a given animal’s milk as its  lactation period progresses.
The Compositions of Various Milks  The figures in the following table are the percent of the milk’s weight  accounted for by its major components.  Milk   Fat   Protein   Lactose   Minerals   Water  Human   4.0   1.1   6.8   0.2   88  Cow   3.7   3.4   4.8   0.7   87  Holstein/Friesian   3.6   3.4   4.9   0.7   87  Brown Swiss   4.0   3.6   4.7   0.7   87  Jersey   5.2   3.9   4.9   0.7   85  Zebu   4.7   3.3   4.9   0.7   86  Buffalo   6.9   3.8   5.1   0.8   83  Yak   6.5   5.8   4.6   0.8   82  Goat   4.0   3.4   4.5   0.8   88  Sheep   7.5   6.0   4.8   1.0   80  Camel   2.9   3.9   5.4   0.8   87  Reindeer   17   11   2.8   1.5   68  Horse   1.2   2.0   6.3   0.3   90  Fin whale   42   12   1.3   1.4   43  Milk in Infancy and Childhood: Nutrition and Allergies  In the middle of the 20th century, when nutrition was thought to be a simple  matter of protein, calories, vitamins, and minerals, cow’s milk seemed a good  substitute for mother’s milk: more than half of all six-month-olds in the United  States drank it. Now that figure is down to less than 10%. Physicians now  recommend that plain cow’s milk not be fed to children younger than one year.  One reason is that it provides too much protein, and not enough iron and highly  unsaturated fats, for the human infant’s needs. (Carefully prepared formula milks
are better approximations of breast milk.) Another disadvantage to the early use of  cow’s milk is that it can trigger an allergy. The infant’s digestive system is not fully  formed, and can allow some food protein and protein fragments to pass directly  into the blood. These foreign molecules then provoke a defensive response from  the immune system, and that response is strengthened each time the infant eats.  Somewhere between 1% and 10% of American infants suffer from an allergy to the  abundant protein in cow’s milk, whose symptoms may range from mild discomfort  to intestinal damage to shock. Most children eventually grow out of milk allergy.  Milk after Infancy: Dealing with Lactose  In the animal world, humans are exceptional for consuming milk of any kind after  they have started eating solid food. And people who drink milk after infancy are  the exception within the human species. The obstacle is the milk sugar lactose,  which can’t be absorbed and used by the body as is: it must first be broken down  into its component sugars by digestive enzymes in the small intestine. The lactose-  digesting enzyme,   lactase,   reaches its maximum levels in the human intestinal  lining shortly after birth, and then slowly declines, with a steady minimum level  commencing at between two and five years of age and continuing through  adulthood.  The logic of this trend is obvious: it’s a waste of its resources for the body to  produce an enzyme when it’s no longer needed; and once most mammals are  weaned, they never encounter lactose in their food again. But if an adult without  much lactase activity does ingest a substantial amount of milk, then the lactose  passes through the small intestine and reaches the large intestine, where bacteria  metabolize it, and in the process produce carbon dioxide, hydrogen, and methane:  all discomforting gases. Sugar also draws water from the intestinal walls, and this  causes a bloated feeling or diarrhea.  Low lactase activity and its symptoms are called   lactose intolerance.   It turns out  that adult lactose intolerance is the rule rather than the exception: lactose-tolerant  adults are a distinct minority on the planet. Several thousand years ago, peoples in  northern Europe and a few other regions underwent a genetic change that  allowed them to produce lactase throughout life, probably because milk was an  exceptionally important resource in colder climates. About 98% of Scandinavians  are lactose-tolerant, 90% of French and Germans, but only 40% of southern
Europeans and North Africans, and 30% of African Americans.  Coping with Lactose Intolerance   Fortunately, lactose intolerance is not the same  as milk intolerance. Lactase-less adults can consume about a cup/250 ml of milk  per day without severe symptoms, and even more of other dairy products. Cheese  contains little or no lactose (most of it is drawn off in the whey, and what little  remains in the curd is fermented by bacteria and molds). The bacteria in yogurt  generate lactose-digesting enzymes that remain active in the human small  intestine and work for us there. And lactose-intolerant milk fans can now buy the  lactose-digesting enzyme itself in liquid form (it’s manufactured from a fungus,  Aspergillus ), and add a few drops to any dairy product just before they consume it.  New Questions about Milk  Milk has been especially valued for two nutritional characteristics: its richness in  calcium, and both the quantity and quality of its protein. Recent research has  raised some fascinating questions about each of these.  Perplexity about Calcium and Osteoporosis   Our bones are constructed from  two primary materials: proteins, which form a kind of scaffolding, and calcium  phosphate, which acts as a hard, mineralized, strengthening filler. Bone tissue is  constantly being deconstructed and rebuilt throughout our adult lives, so healthy  bones require adequate protein and calcium supplies from our diet. Many women  in industrialized countries lose so much bone mass after menopause that they’re at  high risk for serious fractures. Dietary calcium clearly helps prevent this potentially  dangerous loss, or   osteoporosis.   Milk and dairy products are the major source of  calcium in dairying countries, and U.S. government panels have recommended  that adults consume the equivalent of a quart (liter) of milk daily to prevent  osteoporosis.  This recommendation represents an extraordinary concentration of a single food,  and an unnatural one — remember that the ability to drink milk in adulthood, and  the habit of doing so, is an aberration limited to people of northern European  descent. A quart of milk supplies two-thirds of a day’s recommended protein, and  would displace from the diet other foods — vegetables, fruits, grains, meats, and  fish — that provide their own important nutritional benefits. And there clearly  must be other ways of maintaining healthy bones. Other countries, including  China and Japan, suffer much lower fracture rates than the United States and milk-
loving Scandinavia, despite the fact that their people drink little or no milk. So it  The Many Influences on Bone Health  Good bone health results from a proper balance between the two ongoing  processes of bone deconstruction and reconstruction. These processes  depend not only on calcium levels in the body, but also on physical activity  that stimulates bone-building; hormones and other controlling signals; trace  nutrients (including vitamin C, magnesium, potassium, and zinc); and other as  yet unidentified substances. There appear to be factors in tea and in onions  and parsley that slow bone deconstruction significantly. Vitamin D is essential  for the efficient absorption of calcium from our foods, and also influences  bone building. It’s added to milk, and other sources include eggs, fish and  shellfish, and our own skin, where ultraviolet light from the sun activates a  precursor molecule.  The amount of calcium we have available for bone building is importantly  affected by how much we excrete in our urine. The more we lose, the more we  have to take in from our foods. Various aspects of modern eating increase  calcium excretion and so boost our calcium requirement. A high intake of salt  is one, and another is a high intake of animal protein, the metabolism of  whose sulfur-containing amino acids acidifies our urine, and pulls neutralizing  calcium salts from bone.  The best insurance against osteoporosis appears to be frequent exercise of  the bones that we want to keep strong, and a well-rounded diet that is rich in  vitamins and minerals, moderate in salt and meat, and includes a variety of  calcium-containing foods. Milk is certainly a valuable one, but so are dried  beans, nuts, corn tortillas and tofu (both processed with calcium salts), and  several greens — kale, collards, mustard greens.  seems prudent to investigate the many other factors that influence bone strength,  especially those that slow the deconstruction process (see box, p. 15). The best  answer is likely to be not a single large white bullet, but the familiar balanced diet  and regular exercise.
Milk Proteins Become Something More   We used to think that one of the major  proteins in milk, casein (p. 19), was mainly a nutritional reservoir of amino acids  with which the infant builds its own body. But this protein now appears to be a  complex, subtle orchestrator of the infant’s metabolism. When it’s digested, its  long amino acid chains are first broken down into smaller fragments, or peptides. It  turns out that many hormones and drugs are also peptides, and a number of  casein peptides do affect the body in hormone-like ways. One reduces breathing  and heart rates, another triggers insulin release into the blood, and a third  stimulates the scavenging activity of white blood cells. Do the peptides from cow’s  milk affect the metabolism of human children or adults in significant ways? We  don’t yet know.  Milk Biology and Chemistry  How the Cow Makes Milk  Milk is food for the newborn, and so dairy animals must give birth before they will  produce significant quantities of milk. The mammary glands are activated by  changes in the balance of hormones toward the end of pregnancy, and are  stimulated to continue secreting milk by regular removal of milk from the gland.  The optimum sequence for milk production is to breed the cow again 90 days after  it calves, milk it for 10 months, and let it go dry for the two months before the next  calving. In intensive operations, cows aren’t allowed to waste energy on grazing in  variable pastures; they’re given hay or silage (whole corn or other plants, partly  dried and then preserved by fermentation in airtight silos) in confined lots, and are  milked only during their two or three most productive years. The combination of  breeding and optimal feed formulation has led to per-animal yields of a hundred  pounds or 15 gallons/58 liters per day, though the American average is about half  that. Dairy breeds of sheep and goats give about one gallon per day.  The first fluid secreted by the mammary gland is colostrum, a creamy, yellow  solution of concentrated fat, vitamins, and proteins, especially immunoglobulins  and antibodies. After a few days, when the colostrum flow has ceased and the milk  is saleable, the calf is put on a diet of reconstituted and soy milks, and the cow is  milked two or three times daily to keep the secretory cells working at full capacity.  The Milk Factory   The mammary gland is an astonishing biological factory, with
many different cells and structures working together to create, store, and dispense  milk. Some components of milk come directly from the cow’s blood and collect in  the udder. The principal nutrients, however — fats, sugar, and proteins — are  assembled by the gland’s secretory cells, and then released into the udder.  The making of milk. Cells in the cow’s mammary gland synthesize the components of  milk, including proteins and globules of milk fat, and release them into many  thousands of small compartments that drain toward the teat. The fat globules pass  through the cells’ outer membranes, and carry parts of the cell membrane on their  surface.  A Living Fluid   Milk’s blank appearance belies its tremendous complexity and  vitality. It’s alive in the sense that, fresh from the udder, it contains living white  blood cells, some mammary-gland cells, and various bacteria; and it teems with  active enzymes, some floating free, some embedded in the membranes of the fat  globules. Pasteurization (p. 22) greatly reduces this vitality; in fact residual enzyme  activity is taken as a sign that the heat treatment was insufficient. Pasteurized milk  contains very few living cells or active enzyme molecules, so it is more predictably  free of bacteria that could cause food poisoning, and more stable; it develops off-  flavors more slowly than raw milk. But the dynamism of raw milk is prized in  traditional cheese making, where it contributes to the ripening process and  deepens flavor.  Milk owes its milky opalescence to microscopic fat globules and protein bundles,
which are just large enough to deflect light rays as they pass through the liquid.  Dissolved salts and milk sugar, vitamins, other proteins, and traces of many other  compounds also swim in the water that accounts for the bulk of the fluid. The  sugar, fat, and proteins are by far the most important components, and we’ll look  at them in detail in a moment.  First a few words about the remaining components. Milk is slightly acidic, with a  pH between 6.5 and 6.7, and both acidity and salt concentrations strongly affect  the behavior of the proteins, as we’ll see. The fat globules carry colorless vitamin A  and its yellow-orange precursors the carotenes, which are found in green feed and  give milk and undyed butter whatever color they have. Breeds differ in the amount  of carotene they convert into vitamin A; Guernsey and Jersey cows convert little  and give especially golden milk, while at the other extreme sheep, goats, and  water buffalo process nearly all of their carotene, so their milk and butter are  nutritious but white. Riboflavin, which has a greenish color, can sometimes be seen  in skim milk or in the watery translucent whey that drains from the curdled  proteins of yogurt.  Milk Sugar: Lactose  The only carbohydrate found in any quantity in milk is also peculiar to milk (and a  handful of plants), and so was named   lactose,   or “milk sugar.” ( Lac-   is a prefix based  on the Greek word for “milk”; we’ll encounter it again in the names of milk proteins,  acids, and bacteria.) Lactose is a composite of the two simple sugars glucose and  galactose, which are joined together in the secretory cell of the mammary gland,  and nowhere else in the animal body. It provides nearly half of the calories in  human milk, and 40% in cow’s milk, and gives milk its sweet taste.  The uniqueness of lactose has two major practical consequences. First, we need a  special enzyme to digest lactose; and many adults lack that enzyme and have to  be careful about what dairy products they consume (p. 14). Second, most microbes  take some time to make their own lactose-digesting enzyme before they can grow  well in milk, but one group has enzymes at the ready and can get a head start on  all the others. The bacteria known as   Lactobacilli   and   Lactococci   not only grow on  lactose immediately, they also convert it into lactic acid (“milk acid”). They thus  acidify the milk, and in so doing, make it less habitable by other microbes,  including many that would make the milk unpalatable or cause disease. Lactose
and the lactic-acid bacteria therefore turn milk sour, but help prevent it from  spoiling, or becoming undrinkable.  Lactose is one-fifth as sweet as table sugar, and only one-tenth as soluble in water  (200 vs. 2,000 gm/l), so lactose crystals readily form in such products as condensed  milk and ice cream and can give them a sandy texture.  Milk Fat  Milk fat accounts for much of the body, nutritional value, and economic value of  milk. The milk-fat globules carry the fat-soluble vitamins (A, D, E, K), and about half  the calories of whole milk. The higher the fat content of milk, the more cream or  butter can be made from it, and so the higher the price it will bring. Most cows  secrete more fat in winter, due mainly to concentrated winter feed and the  approaching end of their lactation period. Certain breeds, notably Guernseys and  Jerseys from the Channel Islands between Britain and France, produce especially  rich milk and large fat globules. Sheep and buffalo milks contain up to twice the  butterfat of whole cow’s milk (p. 13).  The way the fat is packaged into globules accounts for much of milk’s behavior in  the kitchen. The membrane that surrounds each fat globule is made up of  phospholipids (fatty acid emulsifiers, p. 802) and proteins, and plays two major  roles. It separates the droplets of fat from each other and prevents them from  pooling together into one large mass; and it protects the fat molecules from fat-  digesting enzymes in the milk that would otherwise attack them and break them  down into rancid-smelling and bitter fatty acids.  Creaming   When milk fresh from the udder is allowed to stand and cool for some  hours, many of its fat globules rise and form a fat-rich layer at the top of the  container. This phenomenon is called   creaming,   and for millennia it was the natural  first step toward obtaining fat-enriched cream and butter from milk. In the 19th  century, centrifuges were developed to concentrate the fat globules more rapidly  and thoroughly, and homogenization was invented to prevent whole milk from  separating in this way (p. 23). The globules rise because their fat is lighter than  water, but they rise much faster than their buoyancy alone can account for. It turns  out that a number of minor milk proteins attach themselves loosely to the fat  globules and knit together clusters of about a million globules that have a stronger  lift than single globules do. Heat denatures these proteins and prevents the
globule clustering, so that the fat globules in unhomogenized but pasteurized milk  rise more slowly into a shallower, less distinct layer. Because of their small globules  and low clustering activity, the milks of goats, sheep, and water buffalo are very  slow to separate.  Milk Fat Globules Tolerate Heat…   Interactions between fat globules and milk  proteins are also responsible for the remarkable tolerance of milk and cream to  heat. Milk and cream can be boiled and reduced for hours, until they’re nearly dry,  without breaching the globule membranes enough to release their fat. The  globule membranes are robust to begin with, and it turns out that heating unfolds  many of the milk proteins and makes them more prone to stick to the globule  surface and to each other — so the globule armor actually gets progressively  thicker as heating proceeds. Without this stability to heat, it would be impossible  to make many cream-enriched sauces and reduced-milk sauces and sweets.  …But Are Sensitive to Cold   Freezing is a different story. It is fatal to the fat  globule membrane. Cold milk fat and freezing water both form large, solid, jagged  crystals that pierce, crush, and rend the thin veil of phospholipids and proteins  around the globule, just a few molecules thick. If you freeze milk or cream and then  thaw it, much of the membrane material ends up floating free in the liquid, and  many of the fat globules get stuck to each other in grains of butter. Make the  mistake of heating thawed milk or cream, and the butter grains melt into puddles  of oil.  Milk Proteins: Coagulation by Acid and Enzymes  Two Protein Classes: Curd and Whey   There are dozens of different proteins  floating around in milk. When it comes to cooking behavior, fortunately, we can  reduce the protein population to two basic groups: Little Miss Muffet’s curds and  whey. The two groups are distinguished by their reaction to acids. The handful of  curd proteins, the   caseins,   clump together in acid conditions and form a solid mass,  or   coagulate,   while all the rest, the whey proteins, remain suspended in the liquid.  It’s the clumping nature of the caseins that makes possible most thickened milk  products, from yogurt to cheese. The whey proteins play a more minor role; they  influence the texture of casein curds, and stabilize the milk foams on specialty  coffees. The caseins usually outweigh the whey proteins, as they do in cow’s milk  by 4 to 1.
Both caseins and whey proteins are unusual among food proteins in being largely  tolerant of heat. Where cooking coagulates the proteins in eggs and meat into  solid masses, it does not coagulate the proteins in milk and cream — unless the  milk or cream has become acidic. Fresh milk and cream can be boiled down to a  fraction of their volume without curdling.  The Caseins   The casein family includes four different kinds of proteins that gather  together into microscopic family units called   micelles.   Each casein micelle contains  a   few   thousand   individual   protein   molecules,   and   measures   about   a   ten  thousandth of a millimeter across, about one-fiftieth the size of a fat globule.  Around a tenth of the volume of milk is taken up by casein micelles. Much of the  calcium in milk is in the micelles, where it acts as a kind of glue holding the protein  molecules together. One portion of calcium binds individual protein molecules  together into small clusters of 15 to 25. Another portion then helps pull several  hundred of the clusters together to form the micelle (which is also held together  by the water-avoiding hydrophobic portions of the proteins bonding to each  other).  Keeping Micelles Separate…   One member of the casein family is especially  influential in these gatherings. That is kappa-casein, which caps the micelles once  they reach a certain size, prevents them from growing larger, and keeps them  dispersed and separate. One end of the capping-casein molecule extends from the  micelle out into the surrounding liquid, and forms a “hairy layer” with a negative  electrical charge that repels other micelles.  …And Knitting Them Together in Curds   The intricate structure of casein micelles  can be disturbed in several ways that cause the micelles to flock together and the  milk to curdle. One way is souring. Milk’s normal pH is about 6.5, or just slightly  acidic. If it gets acid enough to approach pH 5.5, the capping-casein’s negative  charge is neutralized, the micelles no longer repel each other, and they therefore  gather in loose clusters. At the same acidity, the calcium glue that holds the  micelles together dissolves, the micelles begin to fall apart, and their individual  proteins scatter. Beginning around pH 4.7, the scattered casein proteins lose their  negative charge, bond to each other again and form a continuous, fine network:  and the milk solidifies, or curdles. This is what happens when milk gets old and  sour, or when it’s intentionally cultured with acid-producing bacteria to make  yogurt or sour cream.
Another way to cause the caseins to curdle is the basis of cheese making.  Chymosin, a digestive enzyme from the stomach of a milk-fed calf, is exquisitely  designed to give the casein micelles a haircut (p. 57). It clips off just the part of the  capping-casein that extends into the surrounding liquid and shields the micelles  from each other. Shorn of their hairy layer, the micelles all clump together —  without the milk being noticeably sour.  A close-up view of milk. Fat globules are suspended in a fluid made up of water,  individual molecules of whey protein, bundles of casein protein molecules, and  dissolved sugars and minerals.  The Whey Proteins   Subtract the four caseins from the milk proteins, and the  remainder, numbering in the dozens, are the whey proteins. Where the caseins are  mainly nutritive, supplying amino acids and calcium for the calf, the whey proteins  include defensive proteins, molecules that bind to and transport other nutrients,  and enzymes. The most abundant one by far is lactoglobulin, whose biological  function   remains   a   mystery.   It’s   a   highly   structured   protein   that   is   readily  denatured by cooking. It unfolds at 172ºF/78ºC, when its sulfur atoms are exposed  to the surrounding liquid and react with hydrogen ions to form hydrogen sulfide  gas, whose powerful aroma contributes to the characteristic flavor of cooked milk  (and many other animal foods).  In boiling milk, unfolded lactoglobulin binds not to itself but to the capping-casein  on the casein micelles, which remain separate; so denatured lactoglobulin doesn’t
coagulate. When denatured in acid conditions with relatively little casein around,  as in cheese whey, lactoglobulin molecules do bind to each other and coagulate  into little clots, which can be made into whey cheeses like true ricotta. Heat-  denatured whey proteins are better than their native forms at stabilizing air  bubbles in milk foams and ice crystals in ice creams; this is why milks and creams  are usually cooked for these preparations (pp. 26, 43).  A model of the milk protein casein, which occurs in micelles, or small bundles a  fraction of the size of a fat globule. A single micelle consists of many individual protein  molecules (lines) held together by particles of calcium phosphate (small spheres).  Milk Flavor  The flavor of fresh milk is balanced and subtle. It’s distinctly sweet from the lactose,  slightly salty from its complement of minerals, and very slightly acid. Its mild,  pleasant aroma is due in large measure to short-chain fatty acids (including butyric  and capric acids), which help keep highly saturated milk fat fluid at body  temperature, and which are small enough that they can evaporate into the air and  reach our nose. Normally, free fatty acids give an undesirable, soapy flavor to foods.  But in sparing quantities, the 4- to 12-carbon rumen fatty acids, branched versions  of these, and acid-alcohol combinations called esters, provide milk with its  fundamental blend of animal and fruity notes. The distinctive smells of goat and  sheep milks are due to two particular branched 8-carbon fatty acids (4-ethyl-  octanoic, 4-methyl-octanoic) that are absent in cow’s milk. Buffalo milk, from  which traditional mozzarella cheese is made, has a characteristic blend of modified
fatty acids reminiscent of mushrooms and freshly cut grass, together with a  barnyardy nitrogen compound (indole).  The basic flavor of fresh milk is affected by the animals’ feed. Dry hay and silage are  relatively poor in fat and protein and produce a less complicated, mildly cheesy  aroma, while lush pasturage provides raw material for sweet, raspberry-like notes  (derivatives of unsaturated long-chain fatty acids), as well as barnyardy indoles.  Flavors from Cooking   Low-temperature pasteurization (p. 22) slightly modifies  milk flavor by driving off some of the more delicate aromas, but stabilizes it by  inactivating enzymes and bacteria, and adds slightly sulfury and green-leaf notes  (dimethyl sulfide, hexanal). High-temperature pasteurization or brief cooking —  heating milk above 170ºF/76ºC — generates traces of many flavorful substances,  including those characteristic of vanilla, almonds, and cultured butter, as well as  eggy   hydrogen   sulfide.   Prolonged   boiling   encourages   browning   or   Maillard  reactions between lactose and milk proteins, and generates molecules that  combine to give the flavor of butterscotch.  The Development of Off-Flavors   The flavor of good fresh milk can deteriorate in  several different ways. Simple contact with oxygen or exposure to strong light will  cause the oxidation of phospholipids in the globule membrane and a chain of  reactions that slowly generate stale cardboard, metallic, fishy, paint-like aromas. If  milk is kept long enough to sour, it also typically develops fruity, vinegary, malty,  and more unpleasant notes.  Exposure to sunlight or fluorescent lights also generates a distinctive cabbage-like,  burnt odor, which appears to result from a reaction between the vitamin riboflavin  and   the   sulfur-containing   amino   acid   methionine.   Clear   glass   and   plastic  containers and supermarket lighting cause this problem; opaque cartons prevent  it.  Unfermented Dairy Products  Fresh milk, cream, and butter may not be as prominent in European and American  cooking as they once were, but they are still essential ingredients. Milk has  bubbled up to new prominence atop the coffee craze of the 1980s and ’90s.
Milks  Milk has become the most standardized of our basic foods. Once upon a time,  people lucky enough to live near a farm could taste the pasture and the seasons in  milk fresh from the cow. City life, mass production, and stricter notions of hygiene  have now put that experience out of reach. Today nearly all of our milk comes from  cows of one breed, the black-and-white Holstein, kept in sheds and fed year-round  on a uniform diet. Large dairies pool the milk of hundreds, even thousands of  cows, then pasteurize it to eliminate microbes and homogenize it to prevent the  fat from separating. The result is processed milk of no particular animal or farm or  season, and therefore of no particular character. Some small dairies persist in  milking other breeds, allowing their herds out to pasture, pasteurizing mildly, and  not homogenizing. Their milk can have a more distinctive flavor, a rare reminder of  what milk used to taste like.  Raw Milk   Careful milking of healthy cows yields sound raw milk, which has its own  fresh taste and physical behavior. But if it’s contaminated by a diseased cow or  careless handling — the udder hangs right next to the tail — this nutritious fluid  soon teems with potentially dangerous microbes. The importance of strict hygiene  in the dairy has been understood at least since the Middle Ages, but life far from  the farms made contamination and even adulteration all too common in cities of  the 18th and 19th centuries, where many children were killed by tuberculosis,  undulant fever, and simple food poisoning contracted from tainted milk. In the  1820s, long before anyone knew about microbes, some books on domestic  economy advocated boiling all milk before use. Early in the 20th century, national  and local governments began to regulate the dairy industry and require that it  heat milk to kill disease microbes.  Today very few U.S. dairies sell raw milk. They must be certified by the state and  inspected frequently, and the milk carries a warning label. Raw milk is also rare in  Europe.  Pasteurization and UHT Treatments   In the 1860s, the French chemist Louis  Pasteur studied the spoilage of wine and beer and developed a moderate heat  treatment that preserved them while minimizing changes in their flavor. It took  several decades for pasteurization to catch on in the dairy. Nowadays, in industrial-  scale production, it’s a practical necessity. Collecting and pooling milk from many  different farms increases the risk that a given batch will be contaminated; and the
plumbing and machinery required for the various stages of processing afford many  more opportunities for contamination. Pasteurization extends the shelf life of milk  by killing pathogenic and spoilage microbes and by inactivating milk enzymes,  especially the fat splitters, whose slow but steady activity can make it unpalatable.  Pasteurized milk stored below 40ºF/5ºC should remain drinkable for 10 to 18 days.  There are three basic methods for pasteurizing milk. The simplest is   batch  pasteurization, in which a fixed volume of milk, perhaps a few hundred gallons, is  slowly agitated in a heated vat at a minimum of 145ºF/62ºC for 30 to 35 minutes.  Industrial-scale operations use the   high-temperature, short-time   (HTST) method, in  which milk is pumped continuously through a heat exchanger and held at a  minimum of 162ºF/72ºC for 15 seconds. The batch process has a relatively mild  effect on flavor, while the HTST method is hot enough to denature around 10% of  the whey proteins and generate the strongly aromatic gas hydrogen sulfide (p. 87).  Though this “cooked” flavor was considered a defect in the early days, U.S.  consumers   have   come   to   expect   it,   and   dairies   now   often   intensify   it   by  pasteurizing at well above the minimum temperature; 171ºF/77ºC is commonly  used.  The third method of pasteurizing milk is the   ultra-high temperature   (UHT) method,  which involves heating milk at 265–300ºF/ 130–150ºC either instantaneously or for  1   to   3   seconds,   and   produces   milk   that,   if   packaged   under   strictly   sterile  conditions, can be stored for months without refrigeration. The longer UHT  treatment imparts a cooked flavor and slightly brown color to milk; cream contains  less lactose and protein, so its color and flavor are less affected.  Sterilized milk has been heated at 230–250ºF/110–121ºC for 8 to 30 minutes; it is  even darker and stronger in flavor, and keeps indefinitely at room temperature.  Homogenization   Left to itself, fresh whole milk naturally separates into two  phases: fat globules clump together and rise to form the cream layer, leaving a fat-  depleted phase below (p. 18). The treatment called   homogenization   was developed  in France around 1900 to prevent creaming and keep the milk fat evenly —  homogeneously — dispersed. It involves pumping hot milk at high pressure  through very small nozzles, where the turbulence tears the fat globules apart into  smaller ones; their average diameter falls from 4 micrometers to about 1. The  sudden increase in globule numbers causes a proportional increase in their surface  area, which the original globule membranes are insufficient to cover. The naked fat  surface attracts casein particles, which stick and create an artificial coat (nearly a
third of the milk’s casein ends up on the globules). The casein particles both weigh  the fat globules down and interfere with their usual clumping: and so the fat  remains evenly dispersed in the milk. Milk is always pasteurized just before or  simultaneously with homogenization to prevent its enzymes from attacking the  momentarily unprotected fat globules and producing rancid flavors.  Homogenization affects milk’s flavor and appearance. Though it makes milk taste  blander — probably because flavor molecules get stuck to the new fat-globule  surfaces   —   it   also   makes   it   more   resistant   to   developing   most   off-flavors.  Homogenized milk feels creamier in the mouth thanks to its increased population  (around sixty-fold) of fat globules, and it’s whiter, because the carotenoid pigments  in the fat are scattered into smaller and more numerous particles.  Powdered Milk in 13th Century Asia  [The Tartar armies] make provisions also of milk, thickened or dried to  the state of a hard paste, which they prepare in the following manner.  They boil the milk, and skimming off the rich or creamy part as it rises  to the top, put it into a separate vessel as butter; for so long as that  remains in the milk, it will not become hard. The milk is then exposed to  the sun until it dries. [When it is to be used] some is put into a bottle  with as much water as is thought necessary. By their motion in riding,  the contents are violently shaken, and a thin porridge is produced,  upon which they make their dinner.  — Marco Polo,   Travels  Nutritional Alteration; Low-Fat Milks   One nutritional alteration of milk is as old  as dairying itself: skimming off the cream layer substantially reduces the fat  content of the remaining milk. Today, low-fat milks are made more efficiently by  centrifuging off some of the globules before homogenization. Whole milk is about  3.5% fat, low-fat milks usually 2% or 1%, and skim milks can range between 0.1 and  0.5%.  More recent is the practice of supplementing milk with various substances. Nearly  all milks are fortified with the fat-soluble vitamins A and D. Low-fat milks have a
thin body and appearance and are usually filled out with dried milk proteins, which  can lend them a slightly stale flavor. “Acidophilus” milk contains   Lactobacillus  acidophilus,   a bacterium that metabolizes lactose to lactic acid and that can take  up residence in the intestine (p. 47). More helpful to milk lovers who can’t digest  lactose is milk treated with the purified digestive enzyme lactase, which breaks  lactose down into simple, absorbable sugars.  Storage   Milk is a highly perishable food. Even Grade A pasteurized milk contains  millions of bacteria in every glassful, and will spoil quickly unless refrigerated.  Freezing is a bad idea because it disrupts milk fat globules and protein particles,  which clump and separate when thawed.  Concentrated Milks   A number of cultures have traditionally cooked milk down for  long keeping and ease of transport. According to business legend, the American  Gail Borden reinvented evaporated milk around 1853 after a rough transatlantic  crossing that sickened the ship’s cows. Borden added large amounts of sugar to  keep his concentrated milk from spoiling. The idea of sterilizing unsweetened milk  in the can came in 1884 from John Meyenberg, whose Swiss company merged  with Nestlé around the turn of the century. Dried milk didn’t appear until around  the turn of the 20th century. Today, concentrated milk products are valued  because they keep for months and supply milk’s characteristic contribution to the  texture and flavor of baked goods and confectionery, but without milk’s water.  Condensed   or   evaporated milk   is made by heating raw milk under reduced pressure  (a partial vacuum), so that it boils between 110 and 140ºF/43–60ºC, until it has lost  about half its water. The resulting creamy, mild-flavored liquid is homogenized,  then canned and sterilized. The cooking and concentration of lactose and protein  cause some browning, and this gives evaporated milk its characteristic tan color  and note of caramel. Browning continues slowly during storage, and in old cans  can produce a dark, acidic, tired-tasting fluid.  For   sweetened condensed milk,   the milk is first concentrated by evaporation, and  then table sugar is added to give a total sugar concentration of about 55%.  Microbes can’t grow at this osmotic pressure, so sterilization is unnecessary. The  high concentration of sugars causes the milk’s lactose to crystallize, and this is  controlled by seeding the milk with preformed lactose crystals to keep the crystals  small   and   inconspicuous   on   the   tongue   (large,   sandy   lactose   crystals   are  sometimes encountered as a quality defect). Sweetened condensed milk has a
milder,   less “cooked” flavor   than   evaporated   milk,   a   lighter   color,   and   the  consistency of a thick syrup.  The Composition of Concentrated Milks  The figures are the percentages of each milk’s weight accounted for by its  major components.  Kind of Milk   Protein   Fat   Sugar   Minerals   Water  Evaporated milk   7   8   10   1.4   73  Evaporated skim milk   8   0.3   11   1.5   79  Sweetened condensed milk   8   9   55   2   27  Dry milk, full fat   26   27   38   6   2.5  Dry milk, nonfat   36   1   52   8   3  Fresh milk   3.4   3.7   4.8   1   87  Cooking with Milk   Much of the milk that we use in the kitchen disappears into a  mixture — a batter or dough, a custard mix or a pudding — whose behavior is  largely determined by the other ingredients. The milk serves primarily as a source  of moisture, but also contributes flavor, body, sugar that encourages browning,  and salts that encourage protein coagulation.  When milk itself is a prominent ingredient — in cream soups, sauces, and  scalloped potatoes, or added to hot chocolate, coffee, and tea — it most often calls  attention to itself when its proteins coagulate. The skin that forms on the surface of  scalded milk, soups, and sauces is a complex of casein, calcium, whey proteins, and  trapped fat globules, and results from evaporation of water at the surface and the  progressive concentration of proteins there. Skin formation can be minimized by  covering the pan or whipping up some foam, both of which minimize evaporation.  Meanwhile,   at   the   bottom   of   the   pan,   the   high,   dehydrating   temperature  transmitted from the burner causes a similar concentration of proteins, which stick  to the metal and eventually scorch. Wetting the pan with water before adding milk  will reduce protein adhesion to the metal; a heavy, evenly conducting pan and a
moderate flame help minimize scorching, and a double boiler will prevent it  (though it’s more trouble).  Between the pan bottom and the surface, particles of other ingredients can cause  curdling by providing surfaces to which the milk proteins can stick and clump  together. And acid in the juices of all fruits and vegetables and in coffee, and  astringent tannins in potatoes, coffee, and tea, make milk proteins especially  sensitive to coagulation and curdling. Because bacteria slowly sour milk, old milk  may be acidic enough to curdle instantly when added to hot coffee or tea. The best  insurance against curdling is fresh milk and careful control of the burner.  Intentionally Curdled Milk  For most cooks most of the time, curdled milk betokens crisis: the dish has  lost its smoothness. But there are plenty of dishes in which the cook  intentionally causes the milk proteins to clot precisely for the textural interest  this creates. The English   syllabub   was sometimes made by squirting warm  milk directly from the udder into acidic wine or juice; and in the 17th century,  the French writer Pierre de Lune described a reduced milk “marbled” by the  addition of currant juice. More contemporary examples include roast pork  braised in milk, which reduces to moist brown nuggets; the Kashmiri practice  of cooking milk down to resemble browned ground meat; and eastern  European summertime cold milk soups like the Polish   chlodnik , thickened by  the addition of “sour salt,” or citric acid.  Cooking Sweetened Condensed Milk   Because it contains concentrated protein  and sugar, sweetened condensed milk will “caramelize” (actually, undergo the  Maillard browning reaction, p. 778) at temperatures as low as the boiling point of  water. This has made cans of sweetened condensed milk a favorite shortcut to a  creamy caramel sauce: many people simply put the can in a pot of boiling water or  a warm oven and let it brown inside. While this does work, it is potentially  dangerous, since any trapped air will expand on heating and may cause the can to  burst open. It’s safer to empty the can into an open utensil and then heat it on the  stovetop, in the oven, or in the microwave.
Milk Foams   A foam is a portion of liquid filled with air bubbles, a moist, light mass  that holds its shape. A meringue is a foam of egg whites, and whipped cream is a  foam of cream. Milk foams are more fragile than egg foams and whipped cream,  and are generally made immediately before serving, usually as a topping for coffee  drinks. They prevent a skin from forming on the drink, and keep it hot by insulating  it and preventing evaporative cooling.  Milk owes its foaming power to its proteins, which collect in a thin layer around the  pockets of air, isolate them, and prevent the water’s strong cohesive forces from  popping the bubbles. Egg foams are also stabilized by proteins (p. 101), while the  foam formed by whipping cream is stabilized by fat (below, p. 31). Milk foams are  more fragile and short-lived than egg foams because milk’s proteins are sparse —  just 3% of the milk’s weight, where egg white is 10% protein — and two-thirds of  the milk proteins are resistant to being unfolded and coagulated into a solid  network, while most of the egg proteins readily do so. However, heat around  160ºF/70ºC does unfold the whey proteins (barely 1% of milk’s weight). And if they  unfold at the air-water boundary of a bubble wall, then the force imbalance does  cause the proteins to bond to each other and briefly stabilize the foam.  Milks and Their Foams   Some milks are better suited to foaming than others.  Because the whey proteins are the critical stabilizers, milks that are fortified with  added protein — usually reduced-fat and skim milks — are most easily foamed.  Full-fat foams, on the other hand, are fuller in texture and flavor. Milk should always  be as fresh as possible, since milk that has begun to sour can curdle when heated.  Espresso Steamers: Simultaneous Bubbles and Heat   Milk foams are usually made with  the help of the steam nozzle on an espresso coffee machine. Steaming milk  accomplishes two essential things simultaneously: it introduces bubbles into the  milk, and it heats the bubbles enough to unfold and coagulate the whey proteins  into a stabilizing web. Steam itself does not make bubbles: it is water vapor, and  simply condenses into the colder water of the milk. Steam makes bubbles by  splashing milk and air together, and it does this most efficiently when the nozzle is  just below the milk surface.  One factor that makes steaming tricky is that very hot milk doesn’t hold its foam  well. A foam collapses when gravity pulls the liquid out of the bubble walls, and  the hotter the liquid, the faster it drains. So you have to use a large enough volume  of cold milk — at least   cup/150 ml — to make sure that the milk doesn’t heat up ⅔
too fast and become too runny before the foam forms.  India’s Galaxy of Cooked Milks  For sheer inventiveness with milk itself as the primary ingredient, no country  on earth can match India. Its dozens of variations on the theme of cooked-  down milk, many of them dating back a thousand years, stem from a simple  fact of life in that warm country: the simplest way to keep milk from souring is  to boil it repeatedly. Eventually it cooks down to a brown, solid paste with  about 10% moisture, 25% lactose, 20% protein and 20% butterfat. Even  without added sugar,   khoa   is almost a candy, so it makes sense that over time,  it and the intermediate concentrations that precede it became the basis for  the most widely made Indian milk sweets. Doughnut-like fried   gulabjamun  and fudge-like   burfi   are rich in lactose, calcium, and protein: a glass of milk  distilled into a morsel.  A second, separate constellation of Indian milk sweets is based on  concentrating the milk solids by curdling them with heat and either lime juice  or sour whey. The drained curds form a soft, moist mass known as   chhanna,  which then becomes the base for a broad range of sweets, notably porous,  springy cakes soaked in sweetened milk or syrup ( rasmalai, rasagollah ).  Cream  Cream is a special portion of milk that is greatly enriched with fat. This enrichment  occurs naturally thanks to the force of gravity, which exerts more of a pull on the  milk’s water than on the less dense fat globules. Leave a container of milk fresh  from the udder to stand undisturbed, and the globules slowly rise through the  water and crowd together at the top. The concentrated cream layer can then be  skimmed off from the fat-depleted “skim” milk below. Milk with 3.5% fat will  naturally yield cream that is about 20%.  We value cream above all for its feel.   Creaminess   is a remarkable consistency,  perfectly   balanced   between   solidity   and   fluidity,   between   persistence   and  evanescence. It’s substantial, yet smooth and seamless. It lingers in the mouth, yet
offers no resistance to teeth or tongue, nor becomes merely greasy. This luxurious  sensation results from the crowding of the fat globules, which are far too small for  our senses to distinguish, into a small volume of water, whose free movement is  thus impeded and slowed.  In addition to its appealing texture, cream has distinctive “fatty” aroma notes from  molecules also found in coconut and peach (lactones). And it offers the virtue of  being a robust, forgiving ingredient. Milk contains roughly equal weights of  protein and fat, while in cream fat outweighs protein by at least 10 to 1. Thanks to  this dilution of the protein, cream is less likely to curdle. And thanks to its  concentration of fat globules, it can be inflated into whipped cream: a far more  substantial and stable foam than milk alone can make.  Though it has certainly been appreciated since the beginning of dairying, cream  spoils faster than the butter that could be made from it, and so it played a minor  role in all but farmhouse kitchens until fairly recently. By the 17th century, French  and English cooks were frothing cream into imitation snow; the English exploited  its layering nature to pile cream skins in the form of a cabbage, and used long,  gentle heating to produce solid, nutty “clouted” cream. Cream’s heyday arrived in  the 18th century, when it went into cakes, puddings, and such savory dishes as  fricassees, stews, and boiled vegetables, and became popular in frozen form as ice  cream. The popularity of cream declined in the 20th century with the nutritional  condemnation of saturated fats, so much so that in many parts of the United States  it’s only available in the long-keeping ultrapasteurized form.  Making Cream   The natural separation of cream from milk by means of gravity  takes 12 to 24 hours, and was superseded late in the 19th century by the merry-go-  round forces of the French centrifugal separator. Once separated, the cream is  pasteurized. In the United States, the minimum temperatures for pasteurizing  cream are higher than the milk minimum (for 20% fat or less, 30 minutes at  155ºF/68ºC; otherwise at 165ºF/74ºC). “Ultrapasteurized” cream is heated for 2  seconds at 280ºF/140ºC (like UHT-treated milk, p. 22; however the cream is not  packaged under strictly sterile conditions, and so is kept refrigerated). Under  refrigeration, ordinary pasteurized cream keeps for about 15 days before bacterial  activity turns it bitter and rancid; ultrapasteurized cream, which has a stronger  cooked flavor, keeps for several weeks. Normally cream is not homogenized  because this makes it harder to whip, but long-keeping ultrapasteurized cream  and relatively thin half-and-half are usually homogenized to prevent continuing
slow separation in the carton.  Keys to Foaming Milk  To get a good volume of milk foam from the steam attachment on an  espresso machine:  •   Use fresh milk right out of the refrigerator, or even chilled for a few  minutes in the freezer.  •   Start with at least   cup/150 ml of milk in a container that will hold at ⅔  least double the initial volume.  •   Keep the nozzle at or just under the milk surface so that it froths  continuously with a moderate flow of steam.  To foam a small volume of milk without steam, separate the foaming and  heating steps:  •   Pour cold, fresh milk into a jar, tighten the lid, and shake it vigorously for  20 seconds or until the contents have doubled in volume. (Or froth in a  plunger-style coffee maker, whose fine screen produces an especially  thick, creamy foam.)  •   Then stabilize the foam: remove the lid, place the jar in the microwave,  and heat on high for about 30 seconds, or until the foam rises to the top  of the jar.  The Importance of Fat Content   Cream is manufactured with a number of  different fat levels and consistencies, each for particular purposes. Light creams are  poured into coffee or onto fruit; heavy creams are whipped or used to thicken  sauces; clotted or “plastic” creams are spread onto breads, pastries, or fruit. The  proportion of fat determines both a cream’s consistency and its versatility. Heavy  cream can be diluted with milk to approximate light cream, or whipped to make a  spreadable semisolid. Light cream and half-and-half contain insufficient numbers  of fat globules to stabilize a whipped foam (p. 32), or to resist curdling in a sauce.  Whipping cream, at between 30 and 40% fat, is the most versatile formulation.
Fat globules in milk and cream. Left to right: Fat globules in homogenized milk (3.5%  fat), and in unhomogenized light cream (20% fat), and in heavy cream (40% fat). The  more numerous fat globules in cream interfere with the flow of the surrounding fluid  and give cream its full-bodied consistency.  Stability in Cooking   How does a high fat content permit the cook to boil a mixture  of heavy cream and salty or acidic ingredients without curdling it, as when  dissolving pan solids or thickening a sauce? The key seems to be the ability of the  fat globule’s surface membrane to latch onto a certain amount of the major milk  protein, casein, when milk is heated. If the fat globules account for 25% or more of  the cream’s weight, then there’s a sufficient area of globule surface to take most of  the casein out of circulation, and no casein curds can form. At lower fat levels,  there’s both a smaller globule surface area   and   a greater proportion of the casein-  carrying water phase. Now the globule surfaces can only absorb a small fraction of  the casein, and the rest bonds together and coagulates when heated. (This is why  acid-curdled mascarpone cheese can be made from light cream, but not from  heavy cream.)  Problems with Cream: Separation   A common problem with unhomogenized  cream is that it continues to separate in the carton: the fat globules slowly rise and  concentrate further into a semisolid layer at the top. At refrigerator temperatures,  the fat inside the globules forms solid crystals whose edges break through the  protective globule membrane, and these slightly protruding fat crystals get stuck  to each other and form microscopic butter grains.
Kinds of Cream  U.S. Term   European Term  Fat   Cont-  ent , %   Use  Half-and-half   12 (10.5–  18)  Coffee, pouring  Crème légère*   12–30   Coffee, pouring, enriching  sauces, soups, etc., whipping  Single cream   18+   Coffee, pouring  Light cream   20 (18–30)   Coffee, pouring (seldom  available)  Coffee cream   25   Coffee, pouring  Light whipping  cream  30–36   Pouring, enriching,  whipping  Crème fraîche **  ( fleurette   or   épaisse )   *  30–40   Pouring, enriching,  whipping (if rich, spreading)  Whipping  cream  35+   Pouring, enriching,  whipping  Heavy whipping  cream  38 (36+)   Pouring, enriching,  whipping  Double cream   48+   Spreading  Clotted cream   55+   Spreading  Plastic cream   65–85   Spreading  * légère : “light”;   fleurette : “liquid”;   épaisse : “thick” due to bacterial culture  ** fraîche : “fresh, cool, new.” In France,   crème fraîche   may be either “sweet” or  cultured with lactic acid bacteria; in the United States, the term always means  cultured, tart, thick cream. See p. 49.  Clotted   Creams   These   days   cooks   generally   consider   the   separation   and  solidification of cream a nuisance. In the past, and in present-day England and the  Middle East, congealed cream has been and is appreciated for its own sake. The  cooks of 17th century England would patiently lift the skins from shallow dishes of
cream and arrange them in wrinkled mounds to imitate the appearance of a  cabbage. Cabbage cream is now a mere curiosity. But the 16th century English  invention called   clotted   cream (and its Turkish and Afghan relatives   kaymak   and  qymaq ) remain vital traditions.  Old-fashioned clotted cream is made by heating cream just short of the boil in  shallow pans for several hours, then letting it cool and stand for a day or so, and  removing the thick solid layer. Heat accelerates the rise of the fat globules,  evaporates some of the water, melts some of the aggregated globules into pockets  of butterfat, and creates a cooked flavor. The result is a mix of thick, granular, fatty  areas and thin, creamy ones, with a rich, nutty flavor and a straw-colored surface.  Clotted cream is around 60% fat, and is spread onto scones and biscuits and eaten  with fruit.  Whipped Cream   The miraculous thing about whipped cream is that simple  physical agitation can transform a luscious but unmanageable liquid into an  equally luscious but shapeable “solid.” Like foamed milk, whipped cream is an  intimate intermingling of liquid and air, with the air divided into tiny bubbles and  the cream spread out and immobilized in the microscopically thin bubble walls.  Common as it is today, this luxurious, velvety foam was very laborious to make  until 1900. Before then, cooks whipped naturally separated cream for an hour or  more, periodically skimming off the foam and setting it aside to drain. The key to a  stable foam of the whole mass of cream is enough fat globules to hold all the fluid  and   air   together,   and   naturally   separated   cream   seldom   reaches   that   fat  concentration, which is about 30%. It took the invention of the centrifugal  separator to produce easily whipped cream.  Food Words:   Cream, Crème, Panna  The English name for the fat-rich portion of milk, like the French word from  which it derives, has associations that are startling but appropriate to its  status as a textural ideal.  Before the Norman Conquest, and to this day in some northern dialects, the  English word for cream was   ream,   a simple offshoot of the Indo-European root  that also gave the modern German   Rahm.   But the French connection
introduced a remarkable hybrid term. In 6th century Gaul, fatty milk was  called   crama,   from the Latin   cremor lactis,   or “heat-thickened substance of  milk.”   Then in the next few centuries it somehow became crossed with a  religious term:   chreme,   or “consecrated oil,” which stems from the Greek word  chriein,   “to anoint,” that gave us   Christ,   “the anointed one.” So in France   crama  became   crème,   and in England   ream   gave way to   cream.  Why this confusion of ancient ritual with rich food? Linguistic accident or  error, perhaps. On the other hand, anointing oil and butterfat   are   essentially  the same substance, so perhaps it was inspiration. In the monastic or farm  kitchens of Normandy, the addition of cream to other foods may have been  considered not just an enrichment, but a kind of blessing.  The Italian word for cream,   panna,   has been traced back to the Latin   pannus,  or “cloth.”   This is apparently a homely allusion to the thin covering that cream  provides for the milk surface.  How Fat Stabilizes Foamed Cream   Unlike the protein foams of egg white, egg  yolk, and milk, the cream foam is stabilized by fat. Initially, the whisk introduces  short-lived air bubbles into the cream. After the first half-minute or so, the bubble  walls begin to be stabilized by the   de   stabilization of the fat globules. As the  globules are knocked all around and into each other by the whipping, parts of  their protective membranes are stripped away by the shearing action of the whisk,  and by the force imbalance in the air bubble walls. The patches of naked fat, which  by their nature avoid contact with water, settle in one of two regions in the cream:  either facing the air pocket in the bubble walls, or stuck to a patch of naked fat on  another globule. The fat globules thus form walls around the air bubbles, and  connections between neighboring walls: and so a continuous network develops.  This network of solid fat spheres not only holds the air bubbles in place, but also  prevents the intervening pockets of fluid from moving very far. And so the foam as  a whole takes on a definite, persistent structure.  If the beating continues past the point at which a fat network has just barely  formed, the gathering of the fat globules continues also, but this process now   de  stabilizes the foam. The fine globule clusters coalesce with each other into ever  coarser masses of butterfat, and the pockets of air and fluid that they hold in place
coarsen as well. The foam loses volume and weeps, and the velvety texture of the  perfectly whipped cream becomes granular. The butter grains in overwhipped  cream leave a greasy residue in the mouth.  Whipped cream as seen through the scanning electron microscope. Left: A view  showing the large cavity-like air bubbles and smaller spherical fat globules (the black  bar represents 0.03 mm). Right: Close-up of an air bubble, showing the layer of partly  coalesced fat that has stabilized the bubble (the bar represents 0.005 mm).  The Importance of Cold   Because even mild warmth softens the butterfat skeleton  of a cream foam, and liquid fat will collapse the air bubbles, it’s essential to keep  cream cold while it’s whipped. It should start out at the low end of 40–50ºF/5–  10ºC, and bowl and beaters should be chilled as well, since both air and beating  will quickly warm everything. Ideally, the cream is “aged” in the refrigerator for 12  hours or more before whipping. Prolonged chilling causes some of the butterfat to  form crystalline needles that hasten the membrane stripping and immobilize the  small portion of fat that’s liquid even in cold cream. Cream that has been left at  room temperature and chilled just before use leaks bubble-deflating liquid fat  from the beginning of whipping, never rises very high, and more easily becomes  granular and watery.  How Different Creams Behave When Whipped   Cream for whipping must be  sufficiently rich in fat to form a continuous skeleton of globules. The minimum fat  concentration is 30%, the equivalent of “single” or “light whipping” cream. “Heavy”  cream, at 38 to 40% fat, will whip faster than light cream, and forms a stiffer,  denser, less voluminous foam. It also leaks less fluid, and so is valued for use in  pastries and baked goods, and for piping into decorative shapes. For other
purposes, heavy cream is usually diluted with a quarter of its volume of milk to  make 30% cream and a lighter, softer foam.  The fat globules in homogenized cream are smaller and more thickly covered with  milk proteins. Homogenized cream therefore forms a finer-textured foam, and  takes at least twice as long to whip (it’s also harder to overwhip to the granular  stage). The cook can cut the whipping time of any cream by slightly acidifying it (1  teaspoon/5 ml lemon juice per cup/250 ml), which makes the proteins in its  globule membranes easier to strip away.  Early Whipped Cream  My Lord of S. Alban’s Cresme Fouettee  Put as much as you please to make, of sweet thick cream into a dish,  and whip it with a bundle of white hard rushes, (of such as they make  whisks to brush cloaks) tied together, till it come to be very thick, and  near a buttery substance. If you whip it too long, it will become butter.  About a good hour will serve in winter. In summer it will require an  hour and a half. Do not put in the dish you will serve it up in, till it be  almost time to set it upon the table. Then strew some powdered fine  sugar into the bottom of the dish it is to go in, and with a broad spatule  lay your cream upon it: when half is laid in, strew some more fine sugar  upon it, and then lay in the rest of the cream (leaving behind some  whey that will be in the bottom) and strew some more sugar upon that.  — Sir Kenelm Digby,   The Closet Opened,   1669  Methods: Hand, Machine, Pressurized Gas   Cream can be foamed by several  different methods. Whisking by hand takes more time and physical exertion than  an electric beater, but incorporates more air and produces a greater volume. The  lightest, fluffiest whipped cream is produced with the help of pressurized gas,  usually nitrous oxide (N 2 O). The most familiar gas-powered device is the aerosol  can, which contains a pressurized mixture of ultrapasteurized cream and dissolved  gas. When the nozzle is opened and the mixture released, the gas expands
instantly and explodes the cream into a very light froth. There is also a device that  aerates ordinary fresh cream with a replaceable canister of nitrous oxide, which is  released in the nozzle and causes great turbulence as it mixes with the cream.  Butter and Margarine  These days, if a cook actually manages to   make   butter in the kitchen, it’s most likely  a disaster: a cream dish has been mishandled and the fat separates from the other  ingredients. That’s a shame: all cooks should relax now and then and intentionally  overwhip some cream! The coming of butter is an everyday miracle, an occasion  for delighted wonder at what the Irish poet Seamus Heaney called “coagulated  sunlight” “heaped up like gilded gravel in the bowl.” Milkfat is indeed a portion of  the sun’s energy, captured by the grasses of the field and repackaged by the cow in  scattered, microscopic globules. Churning milk or cream damages the globules  and frees their fat to stick together in ever larger masses, which we eventually  sieve into the golden hoard that imparts a warm, sweet richness to many foods.  Ancient, Once Unfashionable   All it takes to separate the fat from milk is 30  seconds of sloshing, so butter was no doubt discovered in the earliest days of  dairying. It has long been important from Scandinavia to India, where nearly half  of all milk production goes to making butter for both cooking and ceremonial  purposes. Its heyday came much later in northern Europe, where throughout the  Middle Ages it was eaten mainly by peasants. Butter slowly infiltrated noble  kitchens as the only animal fat allowed by Rome on days of abstention from meat.  In the early 16th century it was also permitted during Lent, and the rising middle  classes adopted the rustic coupling of bread and butter. Soon the English were  notorious for serving meats and vegetables swimming in melted butter, and cooks  throughout Europe exploited butter in a host of fine foods, from sauces to pastries.  Normandy   and   Brittany   in   northwest   France,   Holland,   and   Ireland   became  especially renowned for the quality of their butter. Most of it was made on small  farms using cream that was pooled from several milkings, and was therefore a day  or two old and somewhat soured by lactic acid bacteria. Continental Europe still  prefers the flavor of this lightly fermented “cultured” butter to the “sweet cream”  butter made common in the 19th century by the use of ice, the development of  refrigeration, and the mechanical cream separator.  Around 1870, a shortage of butter in France led to the invention of an imitation,
margarine,   which could be made from a variety of cheap animal fats and vegetable  oils. More margarine than butter is now consumed in the United States and parts  of Europe.  Making Butter   Butter making is in essence a simple but laborious operation: you  agitate a container of cream until the fat globules are damaged and their fat leaks  out and comes together into masses large enough to gather.  Preparing the Cream   For butter making, cream is concentrated to 36–44% fat. The  cream is then pasteurized, in the United States usually at 185ºF/85ºC, a high  temperature that develops a distinct cooked, custardy aroma. After cooling, the  cream for cultured butter may be inoculated with lactic acid bacteria (see p. 35).  The sweet or cultured cream is then cooled to about 40ºF/5ºC and “aged” at that  temperature for at least eight hours so that about half of the milk fat in the  globules forms solid crystals. The number and size of these crystals help determine  the how quickly and completely the milk fat separates, as well as the final texture  of the butter. The properly aged cream is then warmed a few degrees Fahrenheit  and churned.  Churning   Churning is accomplished by a variety of mechanical devices that may  take 15 minutes or a few seconds to damage the fat globules and form the initial  grains of butter. The fat crystals formed during aging distort and weaken the  globule membranes so that they rupture easily. When damaged globules collide  with each other, the liquid portion of their fat flows together to make a continuous  mass, and these grow as churning continues.  Working   Once churning generates the desired size of butter grains, often the size  of a wheat seed, the water phase of the cream is drained off. This is the original  buttermilk, rich in free globule membrane material and with about 0.5% fat (p. 50).  The solid butter grains may be washed with cold water to remove the buttermilk  on their surfaces. The grains are then “worked,” or kneaded together to consolidate  the semisolid fat phase and to break up the embedded pockets of buttermilk (or  water) into droplets around 10 micrometers in diameter, or about the size of a  large fat globule. Cows that get little fresh pasturage and its orange carotene  pigments produce pale milk fat; the butter maker can compensate for this by  adding a dye such as annatto (p. 423) or pure carotene during the working. If the  butter is to be salted, either fine granular salt or a strong brine goes in at this stage  as well. The butter is then stored, blended, or immediately shaped and packaged.
Kinds of Butter   Butter is made in several distinct styles, each with its own  particular qualities. It’s necessary to read labels carefully to learn whether a given  brand has been made with plain cream, fermented cream, or cream flavored to  taste like fermented cream.  Raw cream butter,   whether sweet or cultured, is now nearly extinct in the United  States and a rarity even in Europe. It is prized for its pure cream flavor, without the  cooked-milk note due to pasteurization. The flavor is fragile; it deteriorates after  about 10 days unless the butter is frozen.  Sweet cream butter   is the most basic, and the commonest in Britain and North  America. It’s made from pasteurized fresh cream, and in the United States must be  at least 80% fat and no more than 16% water; the remaining 4% is protein, lactose,  and salts contained in the buttermilk droplets.  Salted   sweet cream butter contains between 1 and 2% added salt (the equivalent  of 1–2 teaspoons per pound/5–10 gm per 500 gm). Originally salt was added as a  preservative, and at 2%, the equivalent of about 12% in the water droplets, it still is  an effective antimicrobial agent.  Cultured cream butter,   the standard in Europe, is the modern, controlled version of  the commonest preindustrial butter, whose raw cream had been slightly soured by  the action of lactic acid bacteria while it slowly separated in the pan before  churning. Cultured butter tastes different: the bacteria produce both acids and  aroma compounds, so the butter is noticeably fuller in flavor. One particular aroma  compound, diacetyl, greatly intensifies the basic butter flavor itself.  There   are   several   different   methods   for   manufacturing   cultured   butter   or  something like it. The most straightforward is to ferment pasteurized cream with  cream-culture bacteria (p. 49) for 12 to 18 hours at cool room temperature before  churning. In the more efficient method developed in the Netherlands in the 1970s  and also used in France, sweet cream is churned into butter, and then the bacterial  cultures and preformed lactic acid are added; flavor develops during cold storage.  Finally, the manufacturer can simply add pure lactic acid and flavor compounds to  sweet cream butter. This is an artificially flavored butter, not a cultured butter.  European-style butter,   an American emulation of French butter, is a cultured butter  with a fat content higher than the standard 80%. France specifies a minimum fat  content of 82% for its butter, and some American producers aim for 85%. These  butters contain 10–20% less water, which can be an advantage when making flaky
pastries (p. 563).  Whipped butter   is a modern form meant to be more spreadable. Ordinary sweet  butter is softened and then injected with about a third its volume of nitrogen gas  (air would encourage oxidation and rancidity). Both the physical stress and the gas  pockets weaken the butter structure and make it easier to spread, though it  remains brittle at refrigerator temperature.  Specialty butters   are made in France for professional bakers and pastry chefs.   Beurre  cuisinier, beurre pâtissier,   and   beurre concentré   are almost pure butterfat, and are  made from ordinary butter by gently melting it and centrifuging the fat off of the  water and milk solids. It can then be recooled as is, or slowly crystallized and  separated into fractions that melt at temperatures from 80ºF/27ºC to 104ºF/40ºC,  depending on the chef’s needs.  The structure of butter, which is about 80% milk fat and 15% water. The fat globules,  solid crystals, and water droplets are embedded in a continuous mass of semisolid  “free” fat that coats them all. A high proportion of ordered crystals imparts a stiff  firmness to cold butter, while free fat lends spreadability and the tendency to leak  liquid fat as it warms and softens.  Butter Consistency and Structure   Well made butters can have noticeably  different consistencies. In France, for example, butter from Normandy is relatively  soft and favored for spreading and making sauces — Elizabeth David said, “When  you get melted butter with a trout in Normandy it is difficult to believe that it is not  cream” — while butter from the Charentes is firmer, and preferred for making
pastries. Many dairies will often produce softer butter in the summer than they do  in the winter. The consistency of butter reflects its microscopic structure, and this is  strongly influenced by two factors: what the cows eat, and how the butter maker  handles their milk. Feeds rich in polyunsaturated fats, especially fresh pasturage,  produce   softer   butters;   hay   and   grain   harder   ones. The   butter   maker   also  influences consistency by the rate and degree of cooling to which he subjects the  cream during the aging period, and by how extensively he works the new butter.  These conditions control the relative proportions of firming crystalline fat and  softening globular and free fat.  Keeping Butter   Because its scant water is dispersed in tiny droplets, properly  made butter resists gross contamination by microbes, and keeps well for some  days at room temperature. However, its delicate flavor is easily coarsened by  simple exposure to the air and to bright light, which break fat molecules into  smaller fragments that smell stale and rancid. Butter also readily absorbs strong  odors from its surroundings. Keep reserves in the freezer, and daily butter in the  cold and dark as much as possible. Rewrap remainders airtight, preferably with the  original foiled paper and not with aluminum foil; direct contact with metal can  hasten fat oxidation, particularly in salted butter. Translucent, dark yellow patches  on the surface of a butter stick are areas where the butter has been exposed to the  air and dried out; they taste rancid and should be scraped off.  Cooking with Butter   Cooks use butter for many different purposes, from greasing  cake pans and soufflé molds to flavoring butterscotch candies. Here are notes on  some of its more prominent roles. The important role of butter in baking is covered  in chapter 10.  Butter as Garnish: Spreads, Whipped Butters   Good plain bread spread with good  plain butter is one of the simplest pleasures. We owe butter’s buttery consistency  to   the   peculiar   melting   behavior   of   milk   fat,   which   softens   and   becomes  spreadable around 60ºF/15ºC, but doesn’t begin to melt until 85ºF/30ºC.  This   workable   consistency   also   means   that   it’s   easy   to   incorporate   other  ingredients into the butter, which then carries their flavor and color and helps  apply them evenly to other foods. Composed butters are masses of room-  temperature butter into which some flavoring and/or coloring has been kneaded;  these can include herbs, spices, stock, a wine reduction, cheese, and pounded  seafood. The mixture can then be spread on another food, or refrigerated, sliced,
and melted into a butter sauce when put onto a hot meat or vegetable. And  whipped butter prepared by the cook is butter lightened by the incorporation of  some air, and flavored with about half its volume of stock, a puree, or some other  liquid, which becomes dispersed into the butter fat in small droplets.  Butter as Sauce: Melted Butter,   Beurre Noisette,   and   Beurre Noir   Perhaps the  simplest of sauces is the pat of butter dropped on a heap of hot vegetables, or  stirred into rice or noodles, or drawn across the surface of an omelet or steak to  give a sheen. Melted butter can be enlivened with lemon juice, or “clarified” to  remove the milk solids (see below).   Beurre noisette   and   beurre noir,   “hazel” and  “black” butter, are melted butter sauces that the French have used since medieval  times to enrich fish, brains, and vegetables. Their flavor is deepened by heating the  butter to about 250ºF/120ºC until its water boils off and the molecules in the white  residue, milk sugar and protein, react with each other to form brown pigments and  new aromas (the browning reaction, p. 777). Hazel butter is cooked until it’s golden  brown, black butter until it’s dark brown (truly black butter is acrid). They’re often  balanced with vinegar or lemon juice, which should be added only after the butter  has cooled below the boiling point; otherwise the cold liquid will cause spattering  and the lemon solids may brown. On their own, they lend a rich nutty flavor to  baked goods.  The emulsified butter sauces —   beurre blanc,   hollandaise, and their relatives — are  described in chapter 11.  Clarified Butter   Clarified   butter is butter whose water and milk solids have been  removed, leaving essentially pure milk fat that looks beautifully clear when melted  and that is better suited for frying (the milk solids scorch at relatively low frying  temperatures). When butter is gently heated to the boiling point of water, the  water bubbles to the top, where the whey proteins form a froth. Eventually all the  water evaporates, the bubbling stops, and the froth dehydrates. This leaves a skin  of dry whey protein on top, and dry casein particles at the bottom. Lift off the  whey skin, pour the liquid fat off of the casein residue, and the purification is  complete.  Frying with Butter   Butter is sometimes used for frying and sautéing. It has the  advantage that its largely saturated fats are resistant to being broken down by  heat, and so don’t become gummy the way unsaturated oils do. It has the  disadvantage that its milk solids brown and then burn around 250ºF, 150º below
the smoke point of many vegetable oils. Adding oil to butter does not improve its  heat tolerance. Clarifying does; butter free of milk solids can be heated to  400ºF/200ºC before burning.  Indian Clarified Butter:   Ghee  In India, clarified butter is the most eminent of all foods. In addition to being  used as an ingredient and frying oil, it is an emblem of purity, an ancient  offering to the gods, the fuel of holy lamps and funeral pyres. Ghee (from the  Sanskrit for “bright”) was born of necessity. Ordinary butter spoils in only ten  days in much of the country, while the clarified fat keeps six to eight months.  Traditionally, ghee has been made from whole cow or buffalo milk that is  soured by lactic acid bacteria into yogurt-like   dahi,   then churned to obtain  butter. Today, industrial manufacturers usually start with cream. The  preliminary souring improves both the quantity of butter obtained and its  flavor; ghee made from sweet cream is said to taste flat. The butter is heated  to 190ºF/90ºC to evaporate its water, then the temperature is raised to  250ºF/120ºC to brown the milk solids, which flavors the ghee and generates  antioxidant compounds that delay the onset of rancidity. The brown residue is  then filtered off (and mixed with sugar to make sweets), leaving the clear  liquid ghee.  Margarine and Other Dairy Spreads   Margarine has been called “a creation of  political intuition and scientific research.” It was invented by a French chemist in  1869, three years after Napoleon III had offered funds for the development of an  inexpensive food fat to supplement the inadequate butter supply for his poorly  nourished but growing urban populace. Others before Hippolyte Mège-Mouriès  had modified solid animal fats, but he had the novel idea of flavoring beef tallow  with milk and working the mixture like butter.  Margarine   caught   on   quickly   in   the   major   European   butter   producers   and  exporters — Holland, Denmark, and Germany — in part because they had surplus  skim milk from butter making that could be used to flavor margarine. In the United  States large-scale production was underway by 1880. Here, the dairy industry and
its allies in government put up fierce resistance in the form of discriminatory taxes  that persisted into the 1970s. Today, basic margarine remains cheap compared to  butter, and Americans consume more than twice as much margarine as butter.  Scandinavia and northern Europe also favor margarine, while France and Britain  still give a substantial edge to butter.  The Rise of Vegetable Margarine   Modern margarine is now made not from solid  animal fats, but from normally liquid vegetable oils. This shift was made possible  around 1900 by German and French chemists who developed the process of  hydrogenation,   which hardens liquid oils by altering the structures of their fatty  acids (p. 801). Hydrogenation allowed manufacturers to make a butter substitute  that spreads easily even at refrigerator temperature, where butter is unusably hard.  An unanticipated bonus for the shift to vegetable oils was the medical discovery  after World War II that the saturated fats typical of meats and dairy products raise  blood cholesterol levels and the risk of heart disease. The ratio of saturated to  unsaturated fat in hard stick margarine is only 1 to 3, where in butter it is 2 to 1.  Recently, however, scientists have found that   trans fatty acids   produced by  hydrogenation actually raise blood cholesterol levels (see box). There are other  methods for hardening vegetable oils that don’t produce trans fatty acids, and  manufacturers are already producing “trans free” margarines and shortenings.  Making Margarine   The gross composition of margarine is the same as butter’s: a  minimum of 80% fat, a maximum of 16% water. The water phase is either fresh or  cultured skim milk, or skim milk reconstituted from powder. Salt is added for flavor,  to reduce spattering during frying, and as an antimicrobial agent. In the United  States, the fat phase is blended from soybean, corn, cottonseed, sunflower, canola,  and other oils. In Europe, lard and refined fish oils are also used. The emulsifier  lecithin is added (0.2%) to stabilize the water droplets and reduce spattering in the  frying pan; coloring agents, flavor extracts, and vitamins A and D are also  incorporated. Nitrogen gas may be pumped in to make a whipped, softer spread.  Hydrogenation By-Products: Trans Fatty Acids  Trans fatty acids are unsaturated fatty acids that nevertheless behave more  like saturated fatty acids (p. 801). They’re formed in the hydrogenation
process, and are the reason that margarines can be as solid as butter and yet  contain half the saturated fat; the trans unsaturated fats contribute a great  deal to margarine firmness. Trans unsaturated fats are also less prone to  oxidation or heat damage and make cooking oils more stable.  Trans fatty acids have come under scrutiny due to the likelihood that they  may contribute to human heart disease. Research has shown that they not  only raise undesirable LDL cholesterol levels in the blood as saturated fats do,  they also lower desirable HDL levels. Manufacturers are now modifying their  processing methods to lower trans fatty acids levels in U.S. margarines and  cooking oils from the present levels, which reach 20–50% of total fatty acids  in hard margarines (less in softer products).  Margarine manufacturers are not the only producers of trans fatty acids: the  microbes in animal rumens are too! Thanks to their activity, the fat in milk,  butter, and cheese averages 5% trans fatty acids, and the meat fat of ruminant  animals — beef and lamb — ranges from 1 to 5%.  Kinds of Margarine and Related Spreads   Stick   and   tub margarines   are the two  most   common   kinds.   They   are   formulated   to   approximate   the   spreadable  consistency of butter at room temperature, and to melt in the mouth. Stick  margarine is only slightly softer than butter in the refrigerator, and like butter can  be creamed with sugar to make icings. Tub margarine is substantially less saturated  and easily spreadable even at 40ºF/5ºC, but too soft to cream or to use in layered  pastries.  Reduced-fat spreads   contain less oil and more water than standard margarines, rely  on   carbohydrate   and   protein   stabilizers,   and   aren’t   suited   to   cooking. The  stabilizers can scorch in the frying pan. If used to replace butter or margarine in  baking, high-moisture spreads throw liquid-solid proportions badly out of balance.  Very-low-fat and no-fat spreads contain so much starch, gum, and/or protein that  there’s nothing there to melt when heated: they dry out and eventually burn.  Specialty margarines   are generally available only to professional bakers. Like the  original   French   oleomargarine,   they   sometimes   contain   beef   tallow. They’re  formulated to have a firm but spreadable consistency over a much broader  temperature range than butter (p. 562).
Ice Cream  Ice cream is a dish that manages to heighten the already remarkable qualities of  cream. By freezing it, we make it possible to taste the birth of creaminess, the  tantalizing transition from solidity to fluidity. But it was no simple matter to freeze  cream in a way that does it justice.  The Invention and Evolution of Ice Cream   Plain frozen cream is hard as a rock.  Sugar makes it softer, but also lowers its freezing point (the dissolved sugar  molecules get in the way as the water molecules settle into ordered crystals). So  sweetened cream freezes well below the freezing point of pure water, and can’t  freeze in the slush that forms when a warm object is placed in snow or ice. What  made ice cream possible was a sprinkling of chemical ingenuity. If salts are added  to the ice, the salts dissolve in the slush, lower   its   freezing point, and allow it to get  cold enough to freeze the sugared cream.  The effect of salts on freezing was known in the 13th century Arab world, and that  knowledge eventually made its way to Italy, where ices made from fruit were  described in the early 17th century. The English term “ice cream” first appears in a  1672 document from the court of Charles II, and the first printed recipes for frozen  waters and creams appear in France and Naples in the 1680s and 1690s. By the  time of the American Revolution, the French had discovered that frequent stirring  of the freezing mix gave a finer, less crystalline texture. They had also developed  super-rich versions with 20 egg yolks per pint of cream ( glace au beurre,   “ice  butter”!), and ice creams flavored with various nuts and spices, orange blossoms,  caramel, chocolate, tea, coffee, and even rye bread.  The First Recipes for Ice Cream  Neige de fleurs d’orange   (“Snow of Orange Flowers”)  You must take sweet cream, and put thereto two handfuls of powdered  sugar, and take petals of orange flowers and mince them small, and  put them in your cream…and put all into a pot, and put your pot in a  wine cooler; and you must take ice, crush it well and put a bed of it with  a handful of salt at the bottom of the cooler before putting in the
pot…. And you must continue putting a layer of ice and a handful of  salt, until the cooler is full and the pot covered, and you must put it in  the coolest place you can find, and you must shake it from time to time  for fear it will freeze into a solid lump of ice. It will take about two hours.  —   Nouveau confiturier,   1682  Fromage à l’angloise   (English Cheese)  Take a   chopine   [16 oz] of sweet cream and the same of milk, half a  pound of powdered sugar, stir in three egg yolks and boil until it  becomes like a thin porridge; take it from the fire and pour it into your  ice mould, and put it in the ice for three hours; and when it is firm,  withdraw the mold, and warm it a little, in order more easily to turn out  your cheese, or else dip your mould for a moment in hot water, then  serve it in a compôtier.  — François Massialot,   La Nouvelle instruction pour les confitures   (1692)  In America, a Food for the Masses   America transformed this delicacy into a food  for the masses. Ice cream making was an awkward, small-batch procedure until  1843, when a Nancy Johnson of Philadelphia patented a freezer consisting of a  large bucket for the brine and a sealed cylinder containing the ice-cream mix and a  mixing   blade,   whose   shaft   protruded   from   the   top   and   could   be   cranked  continuously. Five years later, William G. Young of Baltimore modified Johnson’s  design to make the mix container rotate in the brine for more efficient cooling. The  Johnson-Young freezer allowed large quantities of fine-textured ice cream to be  made with a simple, steady mechanical action.  The second fateful advance toward mass production came in the early 1850s,  when a Baltimore milk dealer by the name of Jacob Fussell decided to use his  seasonal surplus of cream to make ice cream, was able to charge half the going  price in specialty shops, and enjoyed great   success as the first large-scale  manufacturer. His example caught on, so that by 1900 an English visitor was struck  by the “enormous quantities” of ice cream eaten in America. Today Americans still  eat substantially more ice cream than Europeans do, nearly 20 quarts/liters per  person every year.
The Industrialization of Ice Cream   Once ice cream became an industrial product,  industry redefined it. Manufacturers could freeze their ice cream faster and colder  than   the   handmade   version,   and   so   could   produce   very   fine   ice   crystals.  Smoothness   of   texture   became   the   hallmark   of   industrial   ice   cream,   and  manufacturers accentuated it by replacing traditional ingredients with gelatin and  concentrated milk solids. After World War II, they dosed ice cream with greater  amounts of stabilizers to preserve its smoothness in the new and unpredictable  home freezers. And price competition led to the increasing use of additives,  powdered milk from surplus production, and artificial flavors and colors. So an ice  cream hierarchy developed. At the top is traditional but relatively expensive ice  cream; at the bottom, a lower-quality but more stable and affordable version.  The Structure and Consistency of Ice Cream  Ice Crystals, Concentrated Cream, Air   Ice cream consists of three basic elements:  ice crystals made of pure water, the concentrated cream that the crystals leave  behind as they form from the prepared mix, and tiny air cells formed as the mix is  churned during the freezing.  •   The ice crystals form from water molecules as the mix freezes, and give ice  cream its solidity; they’re its backbone. And their size determines whether it  is fine and smooth or coarse and grainy. But they account for only a fraction  of its volume.  •   The concentrated cream is what is left of the mix when the ice crystals form.  Thanks to all the dissolved sugar, about a fifth of the water in the mix  remains unfrozen even at 0ºF/–18ºC. The result is a very thick fluid that’s  about equal portions of liquid water, milk fat, milk proteins, and sugar. This  fluid coats each of the many millions of ice crystals, and sticks them together  — but not too strongly.  •   Air cells are trapped in the ice cream mix when it’s agitated during the  freezing. They interrupt and weaken the matrix of ice crystals and cream,  making that matrix lighter and easier to scoop and bite into. The air cells  inflate the volume of the ice cream over the volume of the original mix. The  increase is called   overrun,   and in a fluffy ice cream can be as much as 100%:  that is, the final ice cream volume is half mix and half air. The lower the  overrun, the denser the ice cream.
Balance   The key to making a good ice cream is to formulate a mix that will freeze  into   a   balanced   structure   of   ice   crystals,   concentrated   cream,   and   air. The  consistency of a balanced, well made ice cream is creamy, smooth, firm, almost  chewy. The smaller the proportion of water in the mix, the easier it is to make small  crystals and a smooth texture. However, too much sugar and milk solids gives a  heavy, soggy, syrupy result, and too much fat can end up churning into butter.  Most good ice cream recipes produce a mix with a water content around 60%, a  sugar content around 15%, and a milk-fat content between 10% — the minimum  for commercial U.S. ice cream — and 20%.  Styles of Ice Cream   Flavorings apart, there are two major styles of ice cream, and  several minor ones.  •   Standard   or   Philadelphia-style   ice cream is made from cream and milk, sugar,  and a few other minor ingredients. Its appeal is the richness and delicate  flavor of cream itself, complemented by vanilla or by fruits or nuts.  •   French   or   custard   ice cream contains an additional ingredient: egg yolks, as  many as 12 per quart/liter. The proteins and emulsifiers in egg yolk can help  keep ice crystals small and the texture smooth even at relatively low milk-fat  and high water levels; some traditional French ice cream mixes are a   crème  anglaise   (p. 98) made with milk, not cream. A mix that contains yolks must be  cooked to disperse the proteins and emulsifiers (and kill any bacteria in the  raw yolks), and the resulting thickened, custard-like mix makes an ice cream  with a characteristic cooked, eggy flavor.  A distinct style of custard ice cream is the Italian   gelato,   which is typically  high in butterfat as well as egg yolks, and frozen with little overrun into a  very rich, dense cream. (The name simply means “frozen,” and in Italy is  applied to a range of frozen preparations.)  •   Reduced-fat, low-fat, and nonfat ice creams   contain progressively less fat than  the 10% minimum specified in the commercial American definition of ice  cream. They keep their ice crystals small with a variety of additives, including  corn syrup, powdered milk, and vegetable gums. “Soft-serve” ice cream is a  reduced-fat preparation whose softness comes from being dispensed at a  relatively high temperature (20–22ºF/–6ºC).  •   Kulfi,   the Indian version of ice cream that may go back to the 16th century, is  made without stirring from milk boiled down to a fraction of its original
volume, and therefore concentrated in texture-smoothing milk proteins and  sugar. It has a strong cooked-milk, butterscotch flavor.  Generally, premium-quality ice creams are made with more cream and egg yolks  than less expensive types. They also contain less air. Hefting cartons is a quick way  to estimate value; there can be as much cream and sugar in an expensive pint as  there is in a cheap quart, which may be up to half empty space.  The Typical Compositions of Ice Creams  With the exception of overrun and calories, the percentages shown are the  percentages by weight of the ice cream  Style  % Milk  Fat  % Other  Milk  Solids   % Sugar  % Yolk  Solids  ( Stabilizers )   % Water  Overrun (%  volume of  original mix)  Calories  per ½  c/125 ml  Premium  standard  16–20   7–8   13–16   (0.3)   64–56   20–40   240–360  Name-brand  standard  12–14   8–11   13–15   (0.3)   67–60   60–90   130–250  Economy  standard  10   11   15   (0.3)   64   90–100   120–150  “French”  ( commercial )  10–14   8–11   13–15   2   67–58   60–90   130–250  French ( hand-  made )  3–10   7–8   15–20   6–8   69–54   0–20   150–270  Gelato   18   7–8   16   4–8   55–50   0–10   300–370  Soft-serve   3–10   11–14   13–16   (0.4)   73–60   30–60   175–190  Low-fat   2–4   12–14   18–21   (0.8)   68–61   75–90   80–135  Sherbet   1–3   1–3   26–35   (0.5)   72–59   25–50   95–140  Kulfi   7   18   5–15   —   70–60   0–20   170–230  Making Ice Cream   There are three basic steps in making ice cream: preparing the  mix, freezing it, and hardening it.  Preparing the Mix   The first step is to choose the ingredients and combine them.  The basic ingredients are fresh cream and milk and table sugar. A mix made of up
to 17% milk fat (equal volumes of whole milk and heavy cream) and 15% table  sugar (¾ cup per quart/180 gm per liter of liquid) will be smooth when frozen  quickly in kitchen ice cream makers. A smooth but lower-fat ice cream can be  made by making a custard-style mix with egg yolks; or by replacing some of the  cream with high protein evaporated, condensed, or powdered milk; or replacing  some of the sugar with thickening corn syrup.  In commercial practice, most or all of the mix ingredients are combined, then  pasteurized, a step that also helps dissolve and hydrate the ingredients. If carried  out at a high enough temperature (above 170ºF/76ºC), cooking can improve the  body and smoothness of the ice cream by denaturing the whey proteins, which  helps minimize the size of the ice crystals. Mixes that include egg yolks are always  cooked until they just thicken. Simple home mixtures of cream and sugar can be  frozen uncooked and have their own fresh flavor.  Freezing   Once the mix has been prepared, it’s prechilled to speed the subsequent  freezing. It’s then frozen as rapidly as possible in a container with coolant-chilled  walls. The mix is stirred to expose it evenly to the cold walls, to incorporate some  air, and above all to produce a smooth texture. Slow cooling of an unstirred mix —  “quiescent cooling” — causes the formation of relatively few ice crystals that grow  to a large size, grow together into clumps, and give a coarse, icy texture. Rapid  cooling with stirring causes the quick production of many “seed” crystals which,  because they share the available water molecules among themselves, cannot grow  as large as a smaller population could; the agitation also helps prevent several  crystals from growing into each other and forming a cluster that the tongue might  notice. And many small crystals give a smooth, velvety consistency.  Hardening   Hardening is the last stage in making ice cream. When the mix  becomes thick and difficult to stir, only about half of its water has frozen into ice  crystals. Agitation is then stopped, and the ice cream is finished with a period of  quiescent freezing, during which another 40% of its water migrates onto existing  ice crystals, leaving the various solid components less lubricated. If hardening is  slow, some ice crystals take up more water than others and coarsen the texture.  Hardening can be accelerated by dividing the newly frozen ice cream into several  small containers whose greater surface area will release heat faster than one large  container.
Ice cream, a semisolid foam. The process of freezing the ice-cream mix forms ice  crystals — solid masses of pure water — and concentrates the remaining mix into a  liquid rich in sugar and milk proteins. Churning fills the mix with air bubbles, which are  stabilized by layers of clustered fat globules.  Freezing Ice Cream with Flying Fortresses and Liquid Nitrogen  On March 13, 1943, the   New York Times   reported that American fliers  stationed in Britain had discovered an ingenious way of making ice cream  while on duty. A story titled “Flying Fortresses Double as Ice-Cream Freezers”  disclosed that the airmen “place prepared ice-cream mixture in a large can  and anchor it to the rear gunner’s compartment of a Flying Fortress. It is well  shaken up and nicely frozen by flying over enemy territory at high altitudes.”  These days, a popular, spectacular, and effective method among chemistry  teachers is to freeze the mix in an open bowl with a gallon or two/8–10 liters  of liquid nitrogen, whose boiling point is–320ºF/–196ºC. When the liquid  nitrogen is stirred in, it boils, bubbles, and chills the mix almost instantly  throughout, a combination that makes a very smooth — and initially very  cold! — ice cream.
Storing and Serving Ice Cream   Ice cream is best stored as cold as possible, at  0ºF/–18ºC or below, to preserve its smoothness. The inevitable coarsening during  storage is due to repeated partial thawings and freezings, which melt the smallest  ice crystals completely and deposit their water molecules on ever fewer, ever larger  crystals. The lower the storage temperature, the slower this coarsening process.  The ice cream surface suffers in two ways during storage: its fat absorbs odors from  the rest of the freezer compartment, and can be damaged and go rancid when  dried out by the freezer air. These problems can be prevented simply by pressing  plastic wrap directly into the surface, being careful not to leave air pockets.  Ideally, ice cream should be allowed to warm up from 0ºF before being served. At  8–10ºF/–13ºC, it doesn’t numb the tongue and taste buds as much, and it contains  more   liquid   water,   which   softens   the   texture.   At   22ºF/–6ºC   —   the   typical  temperature of soft-serve ice cream — half of the water is in liquid form.  Fresh Fermented Milks and Creams  One of the remarkable qualities of milk is that it invites its own preservation. It can  spontaneously foster a particular group of microbes that convert its sugar into  acid, and thereby preserve it for some time from spoiling or harboring disease. At  the same time, the microbes also change the milk’s texture and flavor in desirable  ways. This benign transformation, or   fermentation,   doesn’t happen all the time, but  it happened often enough that milks fermented by bacteria became important  among all dairying peoples. Yogurt and soured creams remain widely popular to  this day.  Why this fortunate fermentation? It’s a combination of milk’s unique chemistry,  and a group of microbes that were ready to exploit this chemistry long before  mammals and milk arrived on earth. The   lactic acid bacteria   are what make possible  the variety of fermented dairy products.  Lactic Acid Bacteria  Milk is rich in nutrients, but its most readily tapped energy source, lactose, is a  sugar found almost nowhere else in nature. This means that not many microbes  have the necessary digestive enzymes at the ready. The elegantly simple key to the  success of the milk bacteria is that they specialize in digesting lactose, and they
extract energy from lactose by breaking it down to lactic acid. Then they release  the lactic acid into the milk, where it accumulates and retards the growth of most  other microbes, including those that cause human disease. They also make some  antibacterial substances, but their main defense is a pleasantly puckery tartness,  one that also causes the casein proteins to gather together in semisolid curds (p.  20) and thicken the milk.  There are two major groups of lactic acid bacteria. The small genus   Lactococcus   (a  combination of the Latin for “milk” and “sphere”) is found primarily on plants (but  it’s a close relative of   Streptococcus,   whose members live mainly on animals and  cause   a   number   of   human   diseases!). The   50-odd   members   of   the   genus  Lactobacillus   (“milk” and “rod”) are more widespread in nature. They’re found both  on plants and in animals, including the stomach of milk-fed calves and the human  mouth, digestive tract, and vagina; and their clean living generally benefits our  insides (see box, p. 47).  The bacteria responsible for the major fermented products were identified around  1900, and pure cultures of individual strains became available then. Nowadays, few  dairies leave their fermentations to chance. Where traditional spontaneously  fermented products may involve a dozen or more different microbes, the industrial  versions are usually limited to two or three. This biological narrowing may affect  flavor, consistency, and health value.  Families of Fresh Fermented Milks  Unlike most cheeses (p. 51), which undergo several stages of manipulation and  continue to evolve for weeks or months, fresh fermented milks are usually finished  and ready for eating within hours or days. A recent encyclopedia catalogued  several hundred different kinds! Most of them originated in western Asia, eastern  Europe, and Scandinavia, and have been carried across the globe by countless  emigrants, many of whom dipped a cloth in their family’s culture, dried it gently,  and guarded it until they could moisten it in the milk of their new home.  The handful of fresh fermented milks familiar in the West, yogurt and soured  creams and buttermilk, represent two major families that developed from the  dairying habits of peoples in two very different climates.  Yogurt   and its relatives are native to a broad and climatically warm area of central  and southwest Asia and the Middle East, an area that includes the probable home
of dairying, and where some peoples still store milk in animal stomachs and skins.  The lactobacilli and streptococci that produce yogurt are “thermophilic,” or heat-  loving   species   that   may   have   come   from   the   cattle   themselves.   They’re  distinguished by their ability to grow rapidly and synergistically at temperatures  up to 113ºF/45ºC, and to generate high levels of preservative lactic acid. They can  set milk into a very tart gel in just two or three hours.  Sour cream, crème fraîche, and buttermilk   are indigenous to relatively cool western  and northern Europe, where milk spoils more slowly and was often left overnight  to separate into cream for buttermaking. The lactococci and   Leuconostoc   species  that produce them are “mesophilic,” or moderate-temperature lovers that probably  first got into milk from particles of pasturage on the cows’ udders. They prefer  temperatures around 85ºF/30ºC but will work well below that range, and develop  moderate levels of lactic acid during a slow fermentation lasting 12 to 24 hours.  The curdling of milk by lactic acid bacteria. As the bacteria ferment lactose and  produce lactic acid, the increasingly acid conditions cause the normal bundled  micelles of casein proteins (left) to fall apart into separate casein molecules, and then  rebond to each other (right). This general rebonding forms a continuous meshwork of  protein molecules that traps the liquid and fat globules in small pockets, and turns the  fluid milk into a fragile solid.
Yogurt  Yogurt   is the Turkish word for milk that has been fermented into a tart, semisolid  mass; it comes from a root meaning “thick.” Essentially the same product has been  made for millennia from eastern Europe and North Africa across central Asia to  India, where it goes by a variety of names and is used for a variety of purposes: it’s  eaten on its own, diluted into drinks, mixed into dressings, and used as an  ingredient in soups, baked goods, and sweets.  Yogurt remained an exotic curiosity in Europe until early in the 20th century, when  the Nobel Prize–winning immunologist Ilya Metchnikov connected the longevity  of certain groups in Bulgaria, Russia, France, and the United States with their  consumption of fermented milks, which he theorized would acidify the digestive  tract and prevent pathogenic bacteria from growing (see box, p. 47). Factory-scale  production and milder yogurts flavored with fruit were developed in the late  1920s, and broader popularity came in the 1960s with Swiss improvements in the  inclusion of flavors and fruits and the French development of a stable, creamy  stirred version.  The Yogurt Symbiosis   By contrast to the complex and variable flora of traditional  yogurts, the industrial version is reduced to the essentials. Standard yogurt  contains just two kinds of bacteria,   Lactobacillus delbrueckii   subspecies   bulgaricus,  and   Streptococcus salivarius   subspecies   thermophilus.   Each bacterium stimulates  the growth of the other, and the combination acidifies the milk more rapidly than  either partner on its own. Initially the streptococci are most active. Then as the  acidity exceeds 0.5%, the acid-sensitive streptococci slow down, and the hardier  lactobacilli take over and bring the final acidity to 1% or more. The flavor  compounds produced by the bacteria are dominated by acetaldehyde, which  provides the characteristic refreshing impression of green apples.  Making Yogurt   There are two basic stages in yogurt making: preparing the milk by  heating and partly cooling it; and fermenting the warm milk.  The Milk   Yogurt is made from all sorts of milk; sheep and goat were probably the  first. Reduced-fat milks make especially firm yogurt because manufacturers mask  their lack of fat by adding extra milk proteins, which add density to the acid-  coagulated protein network. (Manufacturers may also add gelatin, starch, and  other stabilizers to help prevent separation of whey and curd from physical shocks  during transportation and handling.)
Heating the Milk   Traditionally the milk for yogurt was given a prolonged boiling to  concentrate the proteins and give a firmer texture. Today, manufacturers can boost  protein content by adding dry milk powder, but they still cook the milk, for 30  minutes at 185ºF/85ºC or at 195ºF/90ºC for 10 minutes. These treatments improve  the consistency of the yogurt by denaturing the whey protein lactoglobulin,  whose otherwise unreactive molecules then participate by clustering on the  surfaces of the casein particles (p. 20). With the helpful interference of the  lactoglobulins, the casein particles can only bond to each other at a few spots, and  so gather not in clusters but in a fine matrix of chains that is much better at  retaining liquid in its small interstices.  The Fermentation   Once the milk has been heated, it’s cooled down to the desired  fermentation temperature, the bacteria are added (often in a portion of the  previous   batch),   and   the   milk   kept   warm   until   it   sets.   The   fermentation  temperature has a strong influence on yogurt consistency. At the maximum  temperature well tolerated by the bacteria, 104–113ºF/40–45ºC, the bacteria grow  and produce lactic acid rapidly, and the milk proteins gel in just two or three hours;  at 86ºF/30ºC, the bacteria work far more slowly, and the milk takes up to 18 hours  to set. Rapid gelling produces a relatively coarse protein network whose few thick  strands give it firmness but also readily leak whey; slow gelling produces a finer,  more delicate, more intricately branched network whose individual strands are  weaker but whose smaller pores are better at retaining the whey.  Frozen Yogurt   Frozen yogurt became popular in the 1970s and ’80s as a low-fat,  “healthy” alternative to ice cream. In fact, frozen yogurt is essentially ice milk  whose mix includes a small dose of yogurt; the standard proportion is 4 to 1.  Depending on the mixing procedure, the yogurt bacteria may survive in large  numbers or be largely eliminated.  Traditional Fresh Fermented Milks and Creams
Product   Region   Microbes  Fermentation  Temperature,  Time   Acidity   Characteristics  Yogurt   Middle East to  India  Lactobacillus,  delbrueckii,  Streptococcus  salivarius   (in rural  areas, assorted  lactococci and  lactobacilli)  106–114ºF/41–  45ºC, 2–5 hrs, or  86ºF/30ºC, 6–12  hrs  1–4%   Tart, semisolid,  smooth; green  aroma  Buttermilk   Eurasia   Lactococcus lactis,  Leuconostoc  mesenteroides  72ºF/22ºC, 14–16  hrs  0.8–1.1%   Tart, thickened  liquid; buttery  aroma  Crème fraîche   Europe   Lactococcus lactis,  Leuconostoc  mesenteroides  68ºF/20ºC, 15–20  hrs  0.2–0.8%   Mildly tart and  thickened; buttery  aroma  Sour cream   Europe   Lactococcus lactis,  Leuconostoc  mesenteroides  72ºF/22ºC, 16 hrs   0.8%   Mildly tart,  semisolid; buttery  aroma  Ropy milks   Scandinavia   Lactococcus lactis,  Leuconostoc  mesenteroides  (Geotrichum  mold)  68ºF/20ºC, 18 hrs   0.8%   Mildly tart,  semisolid, slimy;  buttery aroma  Koumiss   Central Asia   Lactobacilli,  yeasts  80ºF/27ºC, 2–5 hrs  plus cool aging  0.5–1%   Mildly tart,  thickened liquid;  effervescent, 0.7–  2.5% alcohol  Kefir   Central Asia   Lactococci,  Lactobacilli,  Acetobacter,  yeasts  68ºF/20ºC, 24 hrs   1%   Tart, thickened  liquid; effervescent,  0.1% alcohol
The Health Benefits of Fermented Milks  The bacteria in dairy products may do more for us than just predigest lactose and  create flavor. Recent research findings lend some support to the ancient and  widespread belief that yogurt and other cultured milks can actively promote good  health. Early in the 20th century, the Russian Nobelist Ilya Metchnikov (who  discovered that white blood cells fight bacterial infection) gave a scientific rationale  to this belief, when he proposed that the lactic acid bacteria in fermented milks  eliminate toxic microbes in our digestive system that otherwise shorten our lives.  Hence Dr. James Empringham’s charming title of 1926:   Intestinal Gardening for the  Prolongation of Youth.  Metchnikov was prescient. Research over the last couple of decades has established  that certain lactic acid bacteria, the Bifidobacteria, are fostered by breast milk, do  colonize the infant intestine, and help keep it healthy by acidifying it and by  producing various antibacterial substances. Once we’re weaned onto a mixed diet,  the Bifidobacterial majority in the intestine recedes in favor of a mixed population  of   Streptococcus, Staphylococcus, E. coli,   and yeasts. The standard industrial yogurt  and buttermilk bacteria are specialized to grow well in milk and can’t survive inside  the human body. But other bacteria found in traditional, spontaneously fermented  milks —   Lactobacillus fermentum, L. casei,   and   L. brevis,   for example — as well as   L.  plantarum   from pickled vegetables, and the intestinal native   L. acidophilus,   do take  up residence in us. Particular strains of these bacteria variously adhere to and shield  the intestinal wall, secrete antibacterial compounds, boost the body’s immune  response to particular disease microbes, dismantle cholesterol and cholesterol-  consuming bile acids, and reduce the production of potential carcinogens.  These activities may not amount to prolonging our youth, but they’re certainly  desirable! Increasingly, manufacturers are adding “probiotic” Lactobacilli and even  Bifidobacteria to their cultured milk products, and note that fact on the label. Such  products, approximations of the original fermented milks that contained an even  more diverse bacterial flora, allow us to plant our inner gardens with the most  companionable microbes we’re currently aware of.
Soured Creams and Buttermilk, Including Crème Fraîche  Before the advent of the centrifugal separator, butter was made in western Europe  by allowing raw milk to stand overnight or longer, skimming off the cream that  rose to the top, and churning the cream. During the hours of gravity separation,  bacteria would grow spontaneously in the milk and give the cream and the butter  made from it a characteristic aroma and tartness.  “Cream cultures” is a convenient shorthand for products that are now intentionally  seeded with these same bacteria, which are various species of   Lactococcus   and  Leuconostoc,   and have three important characteristics. They grow best at moderate  temperatures, well below the typical temperature of yogurt fermentation; they’re  only moderate acid-producers, so the milks and creams they ferment never get  extremely sour; and certain strains have the ability to convert a minor milk  component,   citrate,   into   a   warmly   aromatic   compound   called   diacetyl   that  miraculously complements the flavor of butterfat. It’s fascinating that this single  bacterial product is so closely associated with the flavor of butter that all by itself,  diacetyl makes foods taste buttery: even chardonnay wines (p. 730). To accentuate  this flavor note, manufacturers sometimes add citrate to the milk or cream before  fermentation,   and   they   ferment   in   the   cool   conditions   that   favor   diacetyl  production.  Crème Fraîche   Crème fraîche is a versatile preparation. Thick, tart, and with an  aroma that can be delicately nutty or buttery, it is a wonderful complement to  fresh fruit, to caviar, and to certain pastries. And thanks to its high fat and  correspondingly low protein content, it can be cooked in a sauce or even boiled  down without curdling.  In   France   today,   crème   fraîche   means   cream   with   30%   fat   that   has   been  pasteurized at moderate temperatures, not UHT pasteurized (p. 22) or sterilized.  ( Fraîche   means “cool” or “fresh.”) It may, however, be either liquid ( liquide, fleurette )  or thick ( épaisse ). The liquid version is unfermented and has an official refrigerated  shelf life of 15 days. The thick version is fermented with the typical cream culture  for 15 to 20 hours, and has a shelf life of 30 days. As with all fermented milks, the  thickening is an indication that the product has reached a certain acidity (0.8%, pH  4.6) and so a distinct tartness. Commercial American crème fraîche is made  essentially as the French fermented version is, though some manufacturers add a  small amount of rennet for a thicker consistency. A distinctly buttery flavor is found
in products made with Jersey and Guernsey milks (rich in citrate) and with diacetyl-  producing strains of bacteria.  Making Crème Fraîche in the Kitchen   A home version of crème fraîche can be  made by adding some cultured buttermilk or sour cream, which contain cream-  culture bacteria, to heavy cream (1 tablespoon per cup/15 ml per 250 ml), and  letting it stand at a cool room temperature for 12 to 18 hours or until thick.  Sour Cream   Sour cream is essentially a leaner, firmer, less versatile version of  crème fraîche. At around 20% milk fat, it contains enough protein that cooking  temperatures will curdle it. Unless it is used to enrich a dish just before serving,  then, it will give a slightly grainy appearance and texture. Sour cream is especially  prominent in central and eastern Europe, where it has traditionally been added to  soups and stews (goulash, borscht). Immigrants brought a taste for it to American  cities in the 19th century, and by the middle of the 20th it had become fully  naturalized as a base for dips and salad dressings, a topping for baked potatoes,  and an ingredient in cakes. American sour cream is heavier-bodied than the  European   original   thanks   to   the   practice   of   passing   the   cream   through   a  homogenizer twice before culturing it. A small dose of rennet is sometimes added  with the bacteria; this enzyme causes the casein proteins to coagulate into a firmer  gel.  A nonfermented imitation called “acidified sour cream” is made by coagulating the  cream with pure acid. “Sour creams” labeled “low-fat” and “nonfat” replace butterfat  with starch, plant gums, and dried milk protein.  Buttermilk   Most “buttermilk” sold in the United States is not buttermilk at all. True  buttermilk is the low-fat portion of milk or cream remaining after it has been  churned to make butter. Traditionally, that milk or cream would have begun to  ferment before churning, and afterwards the buttermilk would continue to thicken  and develop flavor. With the advent of centrifugal cream separators in the 19th  century, buttermaking produced “sweet” unfermented buttermilk, which could be  sold as such or cultured with lactic bacteria to develop the traditional flavor and  consistency. In the United States, a shortage of true buttermilk shortly after World  War II led to the success of an imitation, “cultured buttermilk,” made from ordinary  skim milk and fermented until acid and thick.  What’s the difference? True buttermilk is less acid, subtler and more complex in  flavor, and more prone to off-flavors and spoilage. Its remnants of fat globule
membranes are rich in emulsifiers like lecithin, and make it especially valuable for  preparing smooth, fine-textured foods of all kinds, from ice cream to baked goods.  (Its excellence for emulsifying led to the Pennsylvania Dutch using it as a base for  red barn paint!) Cultured buttermilk is useful too; it imparts a rich, tangy flavor and  tenderness to griddle cakes and many baked goods.  U.S. “cultured buttermilk” is made by giving skim or low-fat milk the standard  yogurt heat treatment to produce a finer protein gel, then cooling it and  fermenting it with cream cultures until it gels. The gelled milk is cooled to stop the  fermentation and gently agitated to break the curd into a thick but smooth liquid.  “Bulgarian buttermilk” is a version of cultured buttermilk in which the cream  cultures are supplemented or replaced by yogurt cultures, and fermented at a  higher temperature to a higher acidity. It’s noticeably more tart and gelatinous,  with the apple-like sharpness typical of yogurt.  Ropy Scandinavian Milks  A distinctive subfamily among the cream cultures are the “ropy” milks of  Scandinavia, so-called because they’re more than stringy: lift a spoonful of  Finnish   viili,   Swedish   långfil,   or Norwegian   tättemjölk,   and the rest of the bowl  follows it into the air. Some ropy milks are so cohesive that they’re cut with a  knife. This consistency is created by particular strains of cream culture  bacteria that produce long strands of starch-like carbohydrate. The stretchy  carbohydrate absorbs water and sticks to casein particles, so manufacturers  are using ropy strains of   Streptococcus salivarius   as natural stabilizers of yogurt  and other cultured products.  Unusual Fermented Milks: Koumiss and Kefir  Because milk contains an appreciable amount of the sugar lactose, it can be  fermented like grape juice and other sugary fluids into an alcoholic liquid. This  fermentation requires unusual lactose-fermenting yeasts (species of  Saccharomyces, Torula, Candida,   and   Kluyveromyces ). For thousands of years,
the nomads of central Asia have made   koumiss   from mare’s milk, which is  especially rich in lactose, and this tart, effervescent drink, with 1–2% alcohol  and 0.5–1% acid, remains very popular there and in Russia. Other European  and Scandinavian peoples have made alcoholic products from other milks, as  well as sparkling “wine” from whey.  Another remarkable fermented milk little known in the West is   kefir,   which is  most popular in the Caucasus and may well have originated there. Unlike  other fermented milks, in which the fermenting microbes are evenly  dispersed, kefir is made by large, complex particles known as kefir grains,  which house a dozen or more kinds of microbes, including lactobacilli,  lactococci, yeasts, and vinegar bacteria. This symbiotic association grows at  cool room temperatures to produce a tart, slightly alcoholic, effervescent,  creamy product.  Cooking with Fermented Milks  Most cultured milk products are especially susceptible to curdling when made into  sauces or added to other hot foods. Fresh milk and cream are relatively stable, but  the extended heat treatment and high acidity characteristic of cultured products  have already caused some protein coagulation. Anything the cook does to push  this coagulation further will cause the protein network to shrink and squeeze out  some of the whey and produce distinct white particles — protein curds — floating  in the thinned liquid. Heat, salt, additional acid, and vigorous stirring can all cause  curdling. The key to maintaining a smooth texture is gentleness. Heat gradually  and moderately, and stir slowly.  There is a common misconception that crème fraîche is uniquely immune to  curdling. It’s true that while yogurt, sour cream, and buttermilk all will curdle if  they get anywhere near the boil, crème fraîche can be boiled with impunity. But  this versatility has nothing to do with fermentation: it’s a simple matter of fat  content. Heavy cream, at 38 to 40% fat, has so little protein that it doesn’t form  noticeable curds (p. 29).
Cheese  Cheese is one of the great achievements of humankind. Not any cheese in  particular, but cheese in its astonishing multiplicity, created anew every day in the  dairies of the world. Cheese began as a simple way of concentrating and  preserving the bounty of the milking season. Then the attentiveness and ingenuity  of its makers slowly transformed it into something more than mere physical  nourishment: into an intense, concentrated expression of pastures and animals, of  microbes and time.  The Evolution of Cheese  Cheese is a modified form of milk that is more concentrated, more durable, and  more flavorful food than milk is. It’s made more concentrated by curdling milk and  removing much of its water. The nutritious curds of protein and fat are made more  durable by the addition of acid and salt, which discourage the growth of spoilage  microbes. And they’re made more flavorful by the controlled activity of milk and  microbe enzymes, which break the protein and fat molecules apart into small  flavorful fragments.  The long evolution of cheese probably began around 5,000 years ago, when  people in warm central Asia and the Middle East learned that they could preserve  naturally soured, curdled milk by draining off the watery whey and salting the  concentrated curds. At some point they also discovered that the texture of the  curd became more pliable and more cohesive if the curdling took place in an  animal stomach or with pieces of stomach in the same container. These first  cheeses may have resembled modern brine-cured feta, which is still an important  cheese type in the eastern Mediterranean and the Balkans. The earliest good  evidence of cheesemaking known to date, a residue found in an Egyptian pot,  dates from around 2300   BCE .  The Ingredient Essential to Diverse Cheeses: Time   This basic technique of  curdling milk with the help of the stomach extract now called rennet, then  draining and brining the curds, was eventually carried west and north into Europe.  Here people gradually discovered that curds would keep well enough in these  cooler regions with much milder treatments: a less puckery souring and only a  modest brining or salting. This was the discovery that opened the door to the great
diversification of cheeses, because it introduced a fifth ingredient after milk, milk  bacteria, rennet, and salt: time. In the presence of moderate acidity and salt,  cheese became a hospitable medium for the continuing growth and activity of a  variety of microbes and their enzymes. In a sense, cheese came to life. It became  capable of pronounced development and change; it entered the cyclical world of  birth, maturation, and decline.  When were modern cheeses born? We don’t really know, but it was well before  Roman times. In his   Rei rusticae   (“On Rustic Matters,” about 65   CE ), Columella  describes   at   length   what   amounts   to   standard   cheesemaking   practice. The  curdling was done with rennet or various plant fluids. The whey was pressed out,  the curds sprinkled with salt, and the fresh cheese put in a shady place to harden.  Salting and hardening were repeated, and the ripe cheese was then washed, dried,  and packed for storage and shipping. Pliny, who also wrote in the first century, said  that Rome most esteemed cheeses from its provincial outposts, especially Nîmes in  southern France, and the French and Dalmatian Alps.  The Growth of Diversity   During the 10 or 12 centuries after Rome’s strong rule,  the art of cheesemaking progressed in the feudal estates and monasteries, which  worked steadily at settling in forested areas or mountain meadows and clearing  the   land   for   grazing. These   widely   dispersed   communities   developed   their  cheesemaking techniques independently to suit their local landscape, climate,  materials, and markets. Small, perishable soft cheeses, often made from the milk of  a few household animals, were consumed locally and quickly and could only be  sent to nearby towns. Large hard cheeses required the milk of many animals and  were often made by cooperatives (the Gruyère   fruiteries   began around 1200); they  kept indefinitely and could be transported to market from distant regions. The  result was a remarkable diversity of traditional cheeses, which number from 20 to  50 in most countries and several hundred in France alone, thanks to its size and  range of climates.  Cheeses as Artifacts  Behind every cheese there is a pasture of a different green under a  different sky: meadows encrusted with salt that the tides of Normandy
deposit every evening; meadows perfumed with aromas in the windy  sunlight of Provence; there are different herds, with their shelters and  their movements across the countryside; there are secret methods  handed down over the centuries. This shop is a museum: Mr. Palomar,  visiting it, feels as he does in the Louvre, behind every displayed object  the presence of the civilization that gave it form and takes form from it.  — Italo Calvino,   Palomar,   1983  Cheeses of Reputation   The art of cheesemaking had progressed enough by late  medieval times to inspire connoisseurship. The French court received shipments  from Brie, Roquefort, Comté, Maroilles, and Geromé (Münster). Cheeses made near  Parma in Italy and near Appenzell in Switzerland were renowned throughout  Europe. In Britain, Cheshire cheese was famous by Elizabethan times, and Cheddar  and Stilton by the 18th century. Cheese played two roles: for the poor, fresh or  briefly ripened types were staple food, sometimes called “white meat,” while the  rich enjoyed a variety of aged cheeses as one course of their multicourse feasts. By  the early 19th century, the French gastronome Brillat-Savarin found cheese to be  an aesthetic necessity: he wrote that “a dessert without cheese is like a beautiful  woman who is missing an eye.” The golden age of cheese was probably the late  19th and early 20th centuries, when the art was fully developed, local styles had  developed and matured, and the railroads brought country products to the city  while they were still at their best.  Charlemagne Learns to Eat Moldy Cheese  During the Middle Ages, when cheese was evolving into a finely crafted food,  even an emperor of France had to learn a thing or two about how to  appreciate it. About 50 years after Charlemagne’s death in 814, an anonymous  monk at the monastery of Saint Gall wrote a biography of him that includes  this fascinating anecdote (slightly modified from   Early Lives of Charlemagne ,  transl. A. J. Grant, 1922). Charlemagne was traveling, and found himself at a
bishop’s residence at dinnertime.  Now on that day, being the sixth day of the week, he was not willing to  eat the flesh of beast or bird. The bishop, being by reason of the nature  of the place unable to procure fish immediately, ordered some excellent  cheese, white with fat, to be placed before him. Charles…required  nothing else, but taking up his knife and throwing away the mold,  which seemed to him abominable, he ate the white of the cheese. Then  the bishop, who was standing nearby like a servant, drew close and  said “Why do you do that, lord Emperor? You are throwing away the  best part.” On the persuasion of the bishop, Charles…put a piece of the  mold in his mouth, and slowly ate it and swallowed it like butter. Then,  approving the bishop’s advice, he said “Very true, my good host,” and  he added, “Be sure to send me every year to Aix two cartloads of such  cheeses.”  The word I’ve translated as “mold” is   aerugo   in the Latin: literally, “the rust of  copper.”   The cheese isn’t named, and some writers have deduced that it was a  Brie, which then had an external coat of gray-green mold, much the same  color as weathered copper. But I think it was probably more like Roquefort, a  sheep’s-milk cheese veined internally with blue-green mold. The rest of the  anecdote fits a large, firm, internally ripened cheese better than a thin, soft  Brie. It also marks what may have been the first appointment of an official  cheese affineur!  The bishop was alarmed at the impossibility of the task and…rejoined: “My  lord, I can procure the cheeses, but I cannot tell which are of this quality and  which of another….”   Then Charles…spoke thus to the bishop, who from  childhood had known such cheeses and yet could not test them. “Cut them in  two,” he said, “then fasten together with a skewer those that you find to be of  the right quality and keep them in your cellar for a time and then send them  to me. The rest you may keep for yourself and your clergy and family.”  Modern Decline   The modern decline of cheesemaking has its roots in that same  golden age. Cheese and butter factories were born in the United States, a country  with no cheesemaking tradition, just 70 years after the Revolution. In 1851, an
upstate New York dairy farmer named Jesse Williams agreed to make cheese for  neighboring farms, and by the end of the Civil War there were hundreds of such  “associated”   dairies,   whose   economic   advantages   brought   them   success  throughout the industrialized world. In the 1860s and ’70s, pharmacies and then  pharmaceutical companies began mass-producing rennet. At the turn of the  century scientists in Denmark, the United States, and France brought more  standardization in the form of pure microbial cultures for curdling and ripening  cheese, which had once been accomplished by the local, complex flora of each  cheesemaker’s dairy.  The crowning blow to cheese diversity and quality was World War II. In continental  Europe, agricultural lands became battlefields, and dairying was devastated.  During   the   prolonged   recovery,   quality   standards   were   suspended,   factory  production was favored for its economies of scale and ease of regulation, and  consumers   were   grateful   for   any   approximation   of   the   prewar   good   life.  Inexpensive standardized cheese rose to dominance. Ever since, most cheese in  Europe and the United States has been made in factories. Even in France, which in  1973 established a certification program (“ Fromage appellation d’origine contrôlée ”)  to indicate that a cheese has been made by traditional methods and in the  traditional area of production, less than 20% of the total national production  qualifies. In the United States, the market for   process cheese,   a mixture of aged and  fresh cheeses blended with emulsifiers and repasteurized, is now larger than the  market for “natural” cheese, which itself is almost exclusively factory-made.  At the beginning of the 21st century, most cheese is an industrial product, an  expression not of diverse natural and human particulars, but of the monolithic  imperatives of standardization and efficient mass production. Industrial cheese  also requires great ingenuity, has its economic merits, and suits its primary role as  an ingredient in fast-food sandwiches, snacks, and prepared foods (a role that  doubled U.S. per capita cheese consumption between 1975 and 2001). But in its  own way, industrial cheese is a throwback to primitive cheese, a simplified food  that could be and is made anywhere, and that tastes of nowhere in particular.  The Revival of Tradition and Quality   Though finely crafted cheeses will always be  a minor part of modern dairy production, recent years have brought modest signs  of hope. The postwar era and its economic limitations have faded. Some European  countries have seen a revival of appreciation for traditional cheeses, and air travel  has brought them to the attention of an ever-growing number of food lovers. Once
“white meat” for the rural poor, they are now pricey treats for the urban middle  class. In the United States, a few small producers blend respect for tradition with  21st   century   understanding,   and   make   superb   cheeses   of   their   own.   For  enthusiasts willing to seek them out, the world still offers delightful expressions of  this ancient craft.  The Ingredients of Cheese  The three principal ingredients of cheese are milk, rennet enzymes that curdle the  milk, and microbes that acidify and flavor the milk. Each strongly influences the  character and quality of the final cheese.  Milks   Cheese is milk concentrated five- to tenfold by the removal of water; so the  basic character of the milk defines the basic character of the cheese. Milk character  is in turn determined by the kind of animal that produces it, what the animal eats,  the microbes that inhabit the milk, and whether it is raw or pasteurized.  Species   The milks of cows, sheep, and goats taste different from each other (p. 21),  and their cheeses do too. Cow’s milk is more neutral than other milks. Sheep and  buffalo milk have relatively high fat and protein contents and therefore make  richer cheeses. Goat’s milk has a relatively low proportion of curdle-able casein and  usually produces a crumbly, less cohesive curd compared to other milks.  Breed   During the spread of cheesemaking in the Middle Ages, hundreds of  different dairy animal varieties were bred to make the best use of local pasturage.  The Brown Swiss is thought to go back several thousand years. Today, most of  these locally adapted breeds have been replaced by the omnipresent black-and-  white Holstein or Friesian, bred to maximize the milk it yields on standardized feed.  Traditional breeds produce a lower volume of milk, but a milk richer in protein, fat,  and other desirable cheese constituents.  Feed: The Influence of the Seasons   Today most dairy animals are fed year-round  on silage and hay made from just a few fodder crops (alfalfa, maize). This standard  regimen produces a standard, neutral milk that can be made into very good  cheese. However, herds let out to pasture to eat fresh greenery and flowers give  milk of greater aromatic complexity that can make extraordinary cheese. Thanks to  newly sensitive analytical instruments, dairy chemists have recently verified what  connoisseurs have known for centuries: an animal’s diet influences its milk and the  cheese made from it. French studies of alpine Gruyère found a larger number of
flavor compounds in cheeses made during summer pasturage compared to winter  stable feeding, and more herbaceous and floral terpenes and other aromatics (p.  273) in mountain cheeses than cheeses from the high plateaus, which in turn have  more than cheeses from the plains (alpine meadows have more diverse vegetation  than the grassy lowlands).  Like fruits, cheeses made from pasturefed animals are seasonal. The season  depends on the local climate — the summer is green in the Alps, the winter in  California — and how long it takes a particular cheese to mature. Cheeses made  from pasturage are generally recognizable by their deeper yellow color, due to the  greater content of carotenoid pigments in fresh vegetation (p. 267). (Bright orange  cheeses have been dyed.)  Pasteurized and Raw Milks   In modern cheese production, the milk is almost  always pasteurized to eliminate disease and spoilage bacteria. This is really a  practical necessity in industrial cheesemaking, which requires that milk be pooled  and stored from many farms and thousands of animals. The risk of contamination  — which only takes one diseased cow or dirty udder — is too great. Since the late  1940s, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration has required that any cheese made  from unpasteurized, “raw” milk must be aged a minimum of 60 days at a  temperature above 35ºF/2ºC, conditions that are thought to eliminate whatever  pathogens might have been in the milk; and since the early 1950s it has also  banned the import of raw-milk cheeses aged less than 60 days. This means that  soft cheeses made with raw milk are essentially contraband in the United States.  The World Health Organization has considered recommending a complete ban on  the production of raw-milk cheeses.  Of course until barely a century ago, nearly all cheeses were made in small batches  with raw milk, fresh from the udders of small herds whose health was more easily  monitored. And French, Swiss, and Italian regulations actually   forbid   the use of  pasteurized milk for the traditional production of a number of the world’s greatest  cheeses, including Brie, Camembert, Comté, Emmental, Gruyère, and Parmesan.  The reason is that pasteurization kills useful milk bacteria, and inactivates many of  the milk’s own enzymes. It thus eliminates two of the four or five sources of flavor  development during ripening, and prevents traditional cheeses from living up to  their own standards of excellence.  Pasteurization is no guarantee of safety, because the milk or cheese can be  contaminated during later processing. Nearly all outbreaks of food poisoning from
milk or cheese in recent decades have involved pasteurized products. It will be  genuine progress when public health officials help ambitious cheesemakers to  ensure the safety of raw-milk cheeses, rather than making rules that restrict  consumer choice without significantly reducing risk.  The Key Catalyst: Rennet   The making and use of rennet was humankind’s first  venture in biotechnology. At least 2,500 years ago, shepherds began to use pieces  of the first stomach of a young calf, lamb, or goat to curdle milk for cheese; and  sometime later they began to make a brine extract from the stomach. That extract  was the world’s first semipurified enzyme. Now, by means of genetic engineering,  modern biotechnology produces a pure version of the same calf enzyme, called  chymosin,   in a bacterium, a mold, and a yeast. Today, most cheese in the United  States is made with these engineered “vegetable rennets,” and less than a quarter  with traditional rennet from calf stomach (which is often required for traditional  European cheeses).  The curdling of milk by the rennet enzyme chymosin. The bundled micelles of casein  in milk are kept separate from each other by electrically charged micelle components  that repel each other (left). Chymos in selectively trims away these charged kappa-  caseins, and the now uncharged micelles bond to each other to form a continuous  meshwork (right). The liquid milk coagulates into a moist solid.  The Curdling Specialist   Traditional rennet is made from the fourth stomach or  abomasum of a milk-fed calf less than 30 days old, before chymosin is replaced by
other protein-digesting enzymes. The key to rennet’s importance in cheesemaking  is chymosin’s specific activity. Where other enzymes attack most proteins at many  points and break them into many pieces, chymosin effectively attacks only one  milk protein, and at just one point. Its target is the negatively charged kappa-  casein (p. 19) that repels individual casein particles from each other. By clipping  these pieces off, chymosin allows the casein particles to bond to each other and  form a continuous solid gel, the curd.  Since plain acidity alone causes milk to curdle, why do cheesemakers need rennet  at all? There are two reasons. First, acid disperses the casein micelle proteins and  their calcium glue before it allows the proteins to come together, so some casein  and most of the calcium are lost in the whey, and the remainder forms a weak,  brittle curd. By contrast, rennet leaves the micelles mostly intact and causes each  to bond to several others into a firm, elastic curd. Second, the acidity required to  curdle casein is so high that flavor-producing enzymes in the cheese work very  slowly or not at all.  True “Vegetable Rennets” from Thistle Flowers  It has been known at least since Roman times that some plant materials can  curdle milk. Two have been used for centuries to make a distinctive group of  cheeses. In Portugal and Spain, flowers of the wild cardoon thistles ( Cynara  cardunculus   and   C. humilis ) have long been collected and dried in the  summer, and then soaked in warm water in the winter to make sheep and  goat cheeses (Portuguese Serra, Serpa, Azeitão; Spanish Serena, Torta del  Casar, Pedroches). The cardoon rennets are unsuited to cow’s milk, which they  curdle but also turn bitter. Recent research has revealed that Iberian  shepherds had indeed found a close biochemical relative of calf chymosin,  which the thistle flower happens to concentrate in its stigmas.  Cheese Microbes   Cheeses are decomposed and recomposed by a colorful cast of  microbes, perhaps a handful in most modern cheeses made with purified cultures,  but dozens in some traditional cheeses made with a portion of the previous  batch’s starter.
Starter Bacteria   First there are the lactic acid bacteria that initially acidify the milk,  persist in the drained curd, and generate much of the flavor during the ripening of  many semihard and hard cheeses, including Cheddar, Gouda, and Parmesan. The  numbers   of   live   starter   bacteria   in   the   curd   often   drop   drastically   during  cheesemaking, but their enzymes survive and continue to work for months,  breaking down proteins into savory amino acids and aromatic by-products (see  box, p. 62). There are two broad groups of starters: the moderate-temperature  lactococci that are also used to make cultured creams, and the heat-loving  lactobacilli and streptococci that are also used to make yogurt (p. 48). Most  cheeses are acidified by the mesophilic group, while the few that undergo a  cooking step — mozzarella, the alpine and Italian hard cheeses — are acidified by  thermophiles that can survive and continue to contribute flavor. Many Swiss and  Italian starters are still only semidefined mixtures of heat-loving milk bacteria, and  are made the old-fashioned way, from the whey of the previous batch.  The   Propionibacteria   An   important   bacterium   in   Swiss   starter   cultures   is  Propionibacter shermanii,   the   hole-maker. The   propionibacteria   consume   the  cheese’s lactic acid during ripening, and convert it to a combination of propionic  and acetic acids and carbon dioxide gas. The acids’ aromatic sharpness, together  with buttery diacetyl, contributes to the distinctive flavor of Emmental, and the  carbon dioxide forms bubbles, or the characteristic “holes.” The propionibacteria  grow slowly, and the cheesemaker must coddle them along by ripening the cheese  at an unusually high temperature — around 75ºF/24ºC — for several weeks. This  need for warmth may reflect the cheese propionibacteria’s original home, which  was probably animal skin. (At least three other species of propionibacteria inhabit  moist or oily areas of human skin, and   P. acnes   takes advantage of plugged oil  glands.)  The Smear Bacteria   The bacterium that gives Münster, Epoisses, Limburger, and  other strong cheeses their pronounced stink, and contributes more subtly to the  flavor of many other cheeses, is   Brevibacterium linens.   As a group, the brevibacteria  appear to be natives of two salty environments: the seashore and human skin.  Brevibacteria grow at salt concentrations that inhibit most other microbes, up to  15% (seawater is just 3%). Unlike the starter species, the brevibacteria don’t  tolerate acid and need oxygen, and grow only on the cheese surface, not inside.  The cheesemaker encourages them by wiping the cheese periodically with brine,  which   causes   a   characteristic   sticky,   orange-red “smear” of   brevibacteria   to
develop. (The color comes from a carotene-related pigment; exposure to light  usually intensifies the color.) They contribute a more subtle complexity to cheeses  that are wiped for only part of the ripening (Gruyère) or are ripened in humid  conditions (Camembert). Smear cheeses are so reminiscent of cloistered human  skin because both   B. linens   and its human cousin,   B. epidermidis,   are very active at  breaking down protein into molecules with fishy, sweaty, and garlicky aromas  (amines, isovaleric acid, sulfur compounds). These small molecules can diffuse into  the cheese and affect both flavor and texture deep inside.  The Molds, Especially Penicillium   Molds are microbes that require oxygen to  grow, can tolerate drier conditions than bacteria, and produce powerful protein-  and fat- digesting enzymes that improve the texture and flavor of certain cheeses.  Molds readily develop on the rind of almost any cheese that is not regularly wiped  to prevent it. The French St.-Nectaire develops a surface as variegated as lichen-  covered rocks in the fields, with spots of bright yellow or orange standing out from  a complex, muted background. Some cheeses are gardened to allow a diverse flora  to develop, while others are seeded with one particular desired mold. The standard  garden variety molds come from the large and various genus   Penicillium,   which  also gave us the antibiotic penicillin.  Blue Molds   Penicillium roqueforti,   as its name suggests, is what gives sheep’s milk  Roquefort cheese its veins of blue. It and its cousin   P. glaucum   also color the  interior of Stilton and Gorgonzola and the surface of many aged goat cheeses with  the complex pigment produced in their fruiting structures. The blue penicillia are  apparently unique in their ability to grow in the low-oxygen (5%, compared to 21%  in the air) conditions in small fissures and cavities within cheese, a habitat that  echoes the place that gave Roquefort its mold in the first place: the fissured  limestone caves of the Larzac. The typical flavor of blue cheese comes from the  mold’s metabolism of milk fat, of which   P. roqueforti   breaks up 10 to 25%, liberating  short-chain fatty acids that give the peppery feel to sheep’s milk and goat milk  blues, and breaking the longer chains and converting them into substances  (methyl ketones and alcohols) that give the characteristic blue aroma.  White Molds   In addition to the blue penicillia, there are the white ones, all strains  of   P. camemberti,   which make the small, milder surface-ripened soft cow’s milk  cheeses of northern France, Camembert and Brie and Neufchâtel. The white  penicillia create their effects mainly by protein breakdown, which contributes to  the creamy texture and provides flavor notes of mushrooms, garlic, and ammonia.
Why Some People Can’t Stand Cheese  The flavor of cheese can provoke ecstasy in some people and disgust in  others. The 17th century saw the publication of at least two learned European  treatises “ de aversatione casei, ” or “on the aversion to cheese.” And the OWNER  of “ Fromage ” in the 18th century   Encyclopédie   noted that “cheese is one of  those foods for which certain people have a natural repugnance, of which the  cause is difficult to determine.”   Today the cause is clearer. The fermentation of  milk, like that of grains or grapes, is essentially a process of limited, controlled  spoilage. We allow certain microbes and their enzymes to decompose the  original food, but not beyond the point of edibility. In cheese, animal fats and  proteins are broken down into highly odorous molecules. Many of the same  molecules are also produced during uncontrolled spoilage, as well as by  microbial activity in the digestive tract and on moist, warm, sheltered areas of  human skin.  An aversion to the odor of decay has the obvious biological value of steering  us away from possible food poisoning, so it’s no wonder that an animal food  that gives off whiffs of shoes and soil and the stable takes some getting used  to. Once acquired, however, the taste for partial spoilage can become a  passion, an embrace of the earthy side of life that expresses itself best in  paradoxes. The French call a particular plant fungus the   pourriture noble,   or  “noble rot,” for its influence on the character of certain wines, and the  Surrealist poet Leon-Paul Fargue is said to have honored Camembert cheese  with the title   les pieds de Dieu   — the feet of God.  Making Cheese  There are three stages in the transformation of milk into cheese. In the first stage,  lactic acid bacteria convert milk sugar into lactic acid. In the second stage, while  the acidifying bacteria are still at work, the cheesemaker adds the rennet, curdles  the casein proteins, and drains the watery whey from the concentrated curds. In  the last stage, ripening, a host of enzymes work together to create the unique  texture and flavor of each cheese. These are mainly protein- and fat-digesting
enzymes, and they come from the milk, from bacteria originally present in the milk,  the acidifying bacteria, the rennet, and any bacteria or molds enlisted especially  for the ripening process.  Cheese is certainly an expression of the milk, enzymes, and microbes that are its  major ingredients. But it is also — perhaps above all — an expression of the skill  and care of the cheesemaker, who chooses the ingredients and orchestrates their  many chemical and physical transformations. Here is a brief summary of the  cheesemaker’s work.  Curdling   With the exception of some fresh cheeses, the cheesemaker curdles  nearly all cheeses with a combination of starter bacteria acid and rennet. Acid and  rennet form very different kinds of curd structures — acid a fine, fragile gel, rennet  a coarse but robust, rubbery one — so their relative contributions, and how  quickly   they   act,   help   determine   the   ultimate   texture   of   the   cheese.   In   a  predominantly acid coagulation, the curd forms over the course of many hours, is  relatively soft and weak, and has to be handled gently, so it retains much of its  moisture. This is how fresh cheeses and small, surface-ripened goat cheeses begin.  In a predominantly rennet coagulation, the curd forms in less than an hour, is quite  firm, and can be cut into pieces the size of a wheat grain to extract large amounts  of whey. This is how large semihard and hard cheeses begin, from Cheddar and  Gouda to Emmental and Parmesan. Cheeses of moderate size and moisture  content are curdled with a moderate amount of rennet.  Draining, Shaping, and Salting the Curds   The curds can be drained of their whey  in several ways, depending on how much moisture the cheesemaker wants to  remove from the curd. For some soft cheeses, the whole curd is carefully ladled  into molds and allowed to drain by force of gravity alone, for many hours. For  firmer cheeses, the curd is precut into pieces to provide more surface area from  which the whey can drain or be actively pressed. The cut curd of large hard  cheeses may also be “cooked” in its whey to 130ºF/55ºC, a temperature that not  only expels whey from the curd particles, but also affects bacteria and enzymes,  and   encourages   flavor-producing   chemical   reactions   among   some   milk  components. Once the curd pieces are placed in the mold that gives the cheese its  final shape, they may be pressed to squeeze out yet more moisture.  The cheesemaker always adds salt to the new cheese, either by mixing dry salt  with the curd pieces or by applying dry salt or brine to whole cheese. The salt
provides more than its own taste. It inhibits the growth of spoilage microbes, and  it’s an essential regulator of cheese structure and the ripening process. It draws  moisture out of the curds, firms the protein structure, slows the growth of ripening  microbes, and alters the activity of ripening enzymes. Most cheeses contain  between 1.5 and 2% salt by weight; Emmental is the least salty traditional cheese  at about 0.7%, while feta, Roquefort, and pecorino may approach 5%.  Ripening, or   Affinage   Ripening is the stage during which microbes and milk  enzymes transform the salty, rubbery, or crumbly curd into a delicious cheese. The  French term for ripening,   affinage,   comes from the Latin   finus,   meaning “end” or  “ultimate point,” and was used in medieval alchemy to describe the refining of  impure materials. For at least 200 years it has also meant bringing cheeses to the  point at which flavor and texture are at their best. Cheeses have lives: they begin  young and bland, they mature into fullness of character, and they eventually decay  into harshness and coarseness. The life of a moist cheese like Camembert is  meteoric, its prime come and gone in weeks, while the majority of cheeses peak at  a few months, and a dry Comté or Parmesan slowly improves for a year or more.  The cheesemaker initiates and manages this maturation process by controlling the  temperature   and   humidity   at   which   the   cheese   is   stored,   conditions   that  determine the moisture content of the cheese, the growth of microbes, the activity  of   enzymes,   and   the   development   of   flavor   and   texture.   Specialist   cheese  merchants in France and elsewhere are also   affineurs : they buy cheeses before they  have fully matured, and carefully finish the process on their premises, so that they  can sell the cheeses at their prime.  Industrial producers usually ripen their cheeses only partly, then refrigerate them  to suspend their development before shipping. This practice maximizes the  cheeses’ stability and shelf life at the expense of quality.  The Sources of Cheese Diversity  So these are the ingredients that have generated the great diversity of our  traditional cheeses: hundreds of plants, from scrubland herbs to alpine flowers;  dozens of animal breeds that fed on those plants and transformed them into milk;  protein-cutting enzymes from young animals and thistles; microbes recruited from  meadow and cave, from the oceans, from animal insides and skins; and the careful  observation, ingenuity, and good taste of generations of cheesemakers and cheese
lovers. This   remarkable   heritage   underlies   even   today’s   simplified   industrial  cheeses.  The usual way of organizing the diversity of cheeses into a comprehensible system  is to group them by their moisture content and the microbes that ripen them. The  more moisture removed from the curd, the harder the cheese’s eventual texture,  and the longer its lifespan. A fresh cheese with 80% water lasts a few days, while a  soft cheese (45–55%) reaches its prime in a few weeks, a semihard cheese (40–  45%) in a few months, a hard cheese (30–40%) after a year or more. And ripening  microbes create distinctive flavors. The box on p. 60 shows how cheesemakers  create such different cheeses from the same basic materials.  Cheese Flavors from Proteins and Fats  The flavor of a good cheese seems to fill the mouth, and that’s because enzymes from the  milk and rennet and microbes break down the concentrated protein and fat into a wide  range of flavor compounds.  The long, chain-like casein proteins are first broken into medium-sized pieces called  peptides, some still tasteless, some bitter. Usually these are eventually broken down by  microbial enzymes into the 20 individual protein building blocks, the amino acids, a  number of which are sweet or savory. The amino acids can in turn be broken into various  amines, some of which are reminiscent of ocean fish (trimethylamine), others of spoiling  meat (putrescine); into strong sulfur compounds (a specialty of smear bacteria), or into  simple ammonia, a powerful aroma that in overripened cheeses is harsh, like household  cleaner. Though few of these sound appetizing, bare hints of them together build the  complexity and richness of cheese flavor.  Then there are the fats, which are broken down into fatty acids by blue-cheese   Penicillium  roqueforti   and by special enzymes added to Pecorino and Provolone cheeses. Some fatty  acids (short-chain) have a peppery effect on the tongue and an intensified sheepy or goaty  aroma. The blue molds further transform some fatty acids into molecules (methyl ketones)  that create the characteristic aroma of blue cheese. And the copper cauldrons in which the  Swiss cheeses and Parmesan are made damage some milk fat directly, and the fatty acids  thus liberated are further modified to create molecules with the exotic aromas of  pineapple and coconut (esters, lactones).  The more diverse the cast of ripening enzymes, the more complex the resulting collection  of protein and fat fragments, and the richer the flavor.
How Some Familiar Cheeses Are Made  Principal cheese families. Only distinctive processing steps are shown; most  cheeses are also salted, shaped in molds, and aged for some time. Curdling  the milk, cutting the curd, heating the curd particles, and pressing are  methods of removing progressively more moisture from a cheese, slowing its  aging, and extending its edible lifetime.
Choosing, Storing, and Serving Cheese  It has always been a challenge to choose a good cheese, as Charlemagne’s  instructor admitted (p. 53). A late medieval compendium of maxims and recipes for  the middle-class household, known as   Le Ménagier de Paris,   includes this formula  “To recognize good cheese”:  Not at all white like Helen,  Nor weeping, like Magdalene.  Not Argus, but completely blind,  And heavy, like a buffalo.  Let it rebel against the thumb,  And have an old moth-eaten coat.  Without eyes, without tears, not at all white,  Moth-eaten, rebellious, of good weight.  But these rules wouldn’t work for young goat cheeses (white and coatless),  Roquefort (with its pockets of whey), Emmental (eyefull and light), or Camembert  (which should give when thumbed). As always, the proof is in the tasting.  These days, the most important thing is to understand that bulk supermarket  cheeses are only pale (or dyed) imitations of their more flavorful, distinctive  originals. The way to find good cheeses is to buy from a specialist who loves and  knows them, chooses the best and takes good care of them, and offers samples for  tasting.  Cut to Order   Whenever possible, buy portions that are cut while you watch. Precut  portions may be days or weeks old, and their large exposed surfaces inevitably  develop rancid flavors from contact with air and plastic wrap. Exposure to light in  the dairy case also damages lipids and causes off-flavors in as little as two days; in  addition it bleaches the annatto in orange-dyed cheeses, turning it pink. Pregrated  cheese has a tremendous surface area, and while it is often carefully wrapped, it  loses much of its aroma and its carbon dioxide, which also contributes the  impression of staleness.  Cool, Not Cold   If cheese must be kept for more than a few days, it’s usually easiest  to refrigerate it. Unfortunately, the ideal conditions for holding cheese — a humid  55–60ºF/12–15ºC, simply a continuation of its ripening conditions — is warmer
than most refrigerators, and cooler and moister than most rooms. Refrigeration  essentially puts cheese into suspended animation, so if you want an immature soft  cheese to ripen further, you’ll need to keep it warmer.  Cheeses   should   never   be   served   direct   from   the   refrigerator.   At   such   low  temperatures the milk fat is congealed and as hard as refrigerated butter, the  protein network unnaturally stiff, the flavor molecules imprisoned, and the cheese  will seem rubbery and flavorless. Room temperature is best, unless it’s so warm  (above about 80ºF/26ºC) that the milk fat will melt and sweat out of the cheese.  Cheese Crystals  Cheeses usually have such a smooth, luscious texture, either from the  beginning or as a hard cheese melts in the mouth, that an occasional crunch  comes as a surprise. In fact a number of cheeses develop hard, salt-like  crystals of various kinds. The white crystals often visible against the blue mold  of a Roquefort, or detectable in the rind of a Camembert, are calcium  phosphate, deposited because the   Penicillium   molds have made the cheese  less acid and calcium salts less soluble. In aged Cheddar there are often  crystals of calcium lactate, formed when ripening bacteria convert the usual  form of lactic acid into its less soluble mirror (“D”) image. In Parmesan,  Gruyère, and aged Gouda, the crystals may be calcium lactate or else tyrosine,  an amino acid produced by protein breakdown that has limited solubility in  these low-moisture cheeses.  Loose Wrapping   Tight wrapping in plastic film is inadvisable for three reasons:  trapped moisture and restricted oxygen encourages the growth of bacteria and  molds, not always the cheese’s own; strong volatiles such as ammonia that would  otherwise diffuse from the cheese instead impregnate it; and trace volatile  compounds and plastic chemicals migrate into the cheese. Whole, still-developing  cheeses should be stored unwrapped or very loosely wrapped, other cheeses  loosely wrapped in wax paper. Stand them on a wire rack or turn them frequently  to prevent the bottom from getting soggy. It can be fun to play the role of   affineur  and encourage surface or blue mold from a good Camembert or Roquefort to
grow on a fresh goat cheese or in a piece of standard Cheddar. But there’s some  risk that other microbes will join in. If a piece of cheese develops an unusual  surface mold or sliminess or an unusual odor, the safest thing is to discard it.  Simply trimming the surface will not remove mold filaments, which can penetrate  some distance and may carry toxins (p. 67).  Rinds   Should cheese rinds be eaten? It depends on the cheese and the eater. The  rinds of long-aged cheeses are generally tough and slightly rancid, and are best  avoided. With softer cheeses it’s largely a matter of taste. The rind can offer an  interesting contrast to the interior in both flavor and texture. But if safety is a  concern, then consider the rind a protective coating and trim it off.  Cooking with Cheese  When used as an ingredient in cooking, cheese can add both flavor and texture:  either unctuousness or crispness, depending on circumstances. In most cases, we  want the cheese to melt and either mix evenly with other ingredients or spread  over a surface. A certain giving cohesiveness is part of the pleasure of melted  cheese. Stringy cheese can be enjoyable on pizzas, but a nuisance in more formal  dishes. To understand cheese cooking, we need to understand the chemistry of  melting.  Cheese Melting   What is going on when we melt a piece of cheese? Essentially two  things. First, at around 90ºF, the milk fat melts, which makes the cheese more  supple, and often brings little beads of melted fat to the surface. Then at higher  temperatures — around 130ºF/55ºC for soft cheeses, 150ºF/65ºC for Cheddar and  Swiss types, 180ºF/82ºC for Parmesan and pecorino — enough of the bonds  holding the casein proteins together are broken that the protein matrix collapses,  and the piece sags and flows as a thick liquid. Melting behavior is largely  determined by water content. Low-moisture hard cheeses require more heat to  melt because their protein   molecules   are   more concentrated   and so more  intimately bonded to each other; and when melted, they flow relatively little.  Separate pieces of grated moist mozzarella will melt together, while flecks of  Parmesan remain separate. With continued exposure to high heat, moisture will  evaporate   from   the   liquefied   cheese,   which   gets   progressively   stiffer   and  eventually resolidifies. Most cheeses will leak some melted fat, and extensive  breakdown of the protein fabric accentuates this in high-fat cheeses. The ratio of
fat to surrounding protein is just 0.7 in part-skim Parmesan, around 1 in mozzarella  and the alpine cheeses, but 1.3 in Roquefort and Cheddar, which are especially  prone to exuding fat when melted.  Nonmelting Cheeses   There are several kinds of cheese that do not melt on  heating: they simply get drier and stiffer. These include Indian paneer and Latin  queso blanco, Italian ricotta, and most fresh goat cheeses; all of them are curdled  exclusively or primarily by means of acid, not rennet. Rennet creates a malleable  structure of large casein micelles held together by relatively few calcium atoms  and hydrophobic bonds, so this structure is readily weakened by heat. Acid, on the  other hand, dissolves the calcium glue that holds the casein proteins together in  micelles (p. 20), and it eliminates each protein’s negative electrical charge, which  would otherwise cause the proteins to repel each other. The proteins are free to  flock together and bond extensively into microscopic clumps. So when an acid  curd is heated, the first thing to be shaken loose is not the proteins, but water: the  water boils away, and this simply dries out and concentrates the protein even  further. This is why firm paneer and queso blanco can be simmered or fried like  meat, and goat cheeses and ricotta maintain their shape on pizzas or in pasta  stuffings.  Stringiness   Melted cheese becomes stringy when mostly intact casein molecules  are cross-linked together by calcium into long, rope-like fibers that can stretch but  get stuck to each other. If the casein has been attacked extensively by ripening  enzymes, then the pieces are too small to form fibers; so well-aged grating cheeses  don’t get stringy. The degree of cross-linking also matters: a lot and the casein  molecules are so tightly bound to each other that they can’t give with pulling, and  simply snap apart; a little and they pull apart right away. The cross-linking is  determined by how the cheese was made: high acidity removes calcium from the  curd, and high moisture, high fat, and high salt help separate casein molecules  from each other. So the stringiest cheeses are moderate in acidity, moisture, salt,  and age. The most common stringy cheeses are intentionally fibrous mozzarella,  elastic Emmental, and Cheddar. Crumbly cheeses like Cheshire and Leicester, and  moist ones like Caerphilly, Colby, and Jack are preferred for making such melted  preparations as Welsh rarebit, stewed cheese, and grilled-cheese sandwiches.  Similarly, Emmental’s alpine cousin Gruyère is preferred in fondues because it’s  moister, fatter, and saltier. And the Italian grating cheeses — Parmesan, grana  Padano, the pecorinos — have had their protein fabric sufficiently broken that its
pieces readily disperse in sauces, soups, risottos, polenta, and pasta dishes.  Cheeses are at their stringiest right around their melting point — which usually  means right about the point that a piping hot dish gets cool enough to eat — and  get more so the more they are stirred and stretched. One French country dish,  aligot   from the Auvergne, calls for unripened Cantal cheese to be sliced, mixed  with just-boiled potatoes, and sweepingly stirred until it forms an elastic cord that  can stretch for 6 to 10 feet/2–3 meters!  Cheese Sauces and Soups   When cheese is used to bring flavor and richness to a  sauce (Gruyère or Parmesan in French   sauce Mornay,   Fontina in Italian   fonduta ) or a  soup, the aim is to integrate the cheese evenly into the liquid. There are several  ways to avoid the stringiness, lumps, and fat separation that result when the  cheese proteins are allowed to coagulate.  •   Avoid using a cheese that is prone to stringiness in the first place. Moist or  well-aged grating cheeses blend better.  •   Grate the cheese finely so that you can disperse it evenly throughout the  dish from the beginning.  •   Heat the dish as little as possible after the cheese has been added. Simmer  the other ingredients together first, let the pot cool a bit, and   then   add the  cheese. Remember that temperatures above the cheese’s melting point will  tend to tighten the protein patches into hard clumps and squeeze out their  fat. On the other hand, don’t let the dish cool down too much before serving.  Cheese gets stringier and tougher as it cools down and congeals.  •   Minimize stirring, which can push the dispersed patches of cheese protein  back together into a big sticky mass.  •   Include starchy ingredients that will coat the protein patches and fat pockets  and keep them apart. These stabilizing ingredients include flour, cornstarch,  and arrowroot.  •   If the flavor of the dish permits, include some wine or lemon juice — a  preventive or emergency measure well known to fans of the ultimate cheese  sauce,   fondue.  Cheese Fondue   In the Swiss Alps, where for centuries cheese has been melted in a  communal pot at the table and kept hot over a flame for dipping bread, it’s well  known that wine can help keep melted cheese from getting stringy or seizing up.  The ingredients in a classic fondue, in fact, are just alpine cheese — usually
Gruyère — a   tart   white wine, some kirsch, and sometimes (for added insurance)  starch. The combination of cheese and wine is delicious but also savvy. The wine  contributes two essential ingredients for a smooth sauce: water, which keeps the  casein proteins moist and dilute, and tartaric acid, which pulls the cross-linking  calcium off of the casein proteins and binds tightly to it, leaving them glueless and  happily separate. (Alcohol has nothing to do with fondue stability.) The citric acid  in lemon juice will do the same thing. If it’s not too far gone, you can sometimes  rescue a tightening cheese sauce with a squeeze of lemon juice or a splash of  white wine.  Toppings, Gratins   When a thin layer of cheese is heated in the oven or under a  broiler — on a gratin, a pizza, or bruschetta — the intense heat can quickly  dehydrate the casein fabric, toughen it, and cause its fat to separate. To avoid this,  watch the dish carefully and remove it as soon as the cheese melts. On the other  hand, browned, crisp cheese is quite delicious: the   religieuse   at the bottom of the  fondue pot crowns the meal. If you want a cheese topping to brown, then pick a  robust cheese that resists fat loss and stringiness. The grating cheeses are  especially versatile; Parmesan can be formed into a thin disk and melted and  lightly browned in a frying pan or the oven, then molded into cups or other  shapes.  Process and Low-Fat Cheeses  Process cheese   is an industrial version of cheese that makes use of surplus, scrap,  and unripened materials. It began as a kind of resolidified, long-keeping fondue  made from trimmings of genuine cheeses that were unsaleable due to partial  defects or damage. The first industrial attempts to melt together a blend of  shredded cheeses were made at the end of the 19th century. The key insight — the  necessity of “melting salts” analogous to the tartaric acid and citric acid in a  fondue’s wine or lemon juice — came in Switzerland in 1912. Five years later, the  American company Kraft patented a combination of citric acid and phosphates,  and a decade after that it brought out the popular cheddar look-alike Velveeta.  Today, manufacturers use a mixture of sodium citrate, sodium phosphates, and  sodium polyphosphates, and a blend of new, partly ripened, and fully ripened  cheeses. The polyphosphates (negatively charged chains of phosphorus and  oxygen atoms that attract a cloud of water molecules) not only remove calcium
from the casein matrix, but also bind to the casein themselves, bringing moisture  with them and thus further loosening the protein matrix. The same salts that melt  the component cheeses into a homogeneous mass also help the resulting blended  cheese melt nicely when cooked. This characteristic, together with its low cost, has  made process cheese a popular ingredient in fast-food sandwiches.  Low- and no-fat “cheese products” replace fat with various carbohydrates or  proteins. When heated, such products don’t melt; they soften and then dry out.  Cheese and Health  Cheese and the Heart   As a food that is essentially a concentrated version of milk,  cheese shares many of milk’s nutritional advantages and disadvantages. It’s a rich  source of protein, calcium, and energy. Its abundant fat is highly saturated and  therefore tends to raise blood cholesterol levels. However, France and Greece lead  the world in per capita cheese consumption, at better than 2 oz/60 gm per day,  about double the U.S. figures, yet they’re remarkable among Western countries for  their   relatively   low   rates   of   heart   disease,   probably   thanks   to   their   high  consumption of heart-protective vegetables, fruits, and wine (p. 253). Eating  cheese as part of a balanced diet is fully compatible with good health.  Food Poisoning  Cheeses Made from Raw and Pasteurized Milks   Government concerns about the  danger of the various pathogens that can grow in milk led to the U.S. requirement  (originating in 1944, reaffirmed in 1949, and extended to imports in 1951) that all  cheeses aged less than 60 days be made with pasteurized milk. Since 1948 there  have been only a handful of outbreaks of food poisoning in the United States  caused by cheese, nearly all involving contamination of the milk or cheese after  pasteurization. In Europe, where young raw-milk cheeses are still legal in some  countries, most outbreaks have also been caused by pasteurized cheeses. Cheeses  in general present a relatively low risk of food poisoning. Because any soft cheese  contains enough moisture to permit the survival of various human pathogens,  both pasteurized and unpasteurized versions are probably best avoided by people  who may be especially vulnerable to infection (pregnant women, the elderly and  chronically ill). Hard cheeses are inhospitable to disease microbes and very seldom  cause food poisoning.
Storage Molds   In addition to the usual disease microbes, the molds that can grow  on cheese are of some concern. When cheeses are held in storage for some time,  toxin-producing foreign molds ( Aspergillus versicolor, Penicillium viridicatum   and   P.  cyclopium ) may occasionally develop on their rinds and contaminate them to the  depth of up to an inch/2 cm. This problem appears to be very rare, but does make  it advisable to discard cheeses overgrown with unusual mold.  Amines   There is one normal microbial product that can cause discomfort to some  people. In a strongly ripened cheese, the casein proteins are broken down to  amino acids, and the amino acids can be broken down into amines, small  molecules that can serve as chemical signals in the human body. Histamine and  tyramine are found in large quantities in Cheddar, blue, Swiss, and Dutch-style  cheeses, and can cause a rise in blood pressure, headaches, and rashes in people  who are especially sensitive to them.  Tooth Decay   Finally, it has been recognized for decades that eating cheese slows  tooth decay, which is caused by acid secretion from relatives of a yogurt bacterium  (especially   Streptococcus mutans ) that adhere to the teeth. Just why is still not  entirely clear, but it appears that eaten at the end of a meal, when streptococcal  acid production is on the rise, calcium and phosphate from the cheese diffuse into  the bacterial colonies and blunt the acid rise.  Object 1
Eggs  The egg is one of the kitchen’s marvels, and one of nature’s. Its simple, placid shape  houses an everyday miracle: the transformation of a bland bag of nutrients into a  living, breathing, vigorous creature. The egg has loomed large as a symbol for the  enigmatic origins of animals, of humans, of gods, of the earth, of the entire  cosmos. The Egyptian Book of the Dead, the Indian Rg Veda, Greek Orphic  mysteries, and creation myths throughout the world have been inspired by the  eruption of life from within a lifeless, blank shell.  Humpty Dumpty has had a great fall! If eggs inspire any notable feeling today, it’s  boredom tinged by wariness. The chicken egg is now an industrial product, so  familiar that it would be almost invisible — except that it was stigmatized by the  cholesterol phobia of the 1970s and 1980s.  Neither familiarity nor fear should obscure eggs’ great versatility. Their contents are  primal, the unstructured stuff of life. This is why they are protean, why the cook can  use them to generate such a variety of structures, from a light, insubstantial  meringue to a dense, lingeringly rich custard. Eggs reconcile oil and water in a host  of smooth sauces; they refine the texture of candies and ice creams; they give  flavor, substance, and nutritiousness to soups, drinks, breads, pastas, and cakes;  they put a shine on pastries; they clarify meat stocks and wines. On their own,  they’re amenable to being boiled, fried, deep-fried, baked, roasted, pickled, and  fermented.  Meanwhile modern science has only deepened the egg’s aptness as an emblem of  creation. The yolk is a stockpile of fuel obtained by the hen from seeds and leaves,  which are in turn stockpiles of the sun’s radiant energy. The yellow pigments that  gave the yolk its name also come directly from plants, where they protect the  chemical machinery of photosynthesis from being overwhelmed by the sun. So  the egg does embody the chain of creation, from the developing chick back  through the hen to the plants that fed her, and then to the ultimate source of life’s  fire, the yellow sphere of the sky. An egg is the sun’s light refracted into life.  Many animals lay eggs, and humans exploit a number of them, from pigeons and  turkeys to wild birds, penguins, turtles, and crocodiles. The chicken egg is by far
the most commonly eaten in most countries, so I’ll concentrate on it, with  occasional asides on duck eggs.  The Chicken and the Egg  Over the centuries there have been several clever answers to the conundrum,  Which came first: the chicken or the egg? The Church Fathers sided with the  chicken, pointing out that according to Genesis, God first created the creatures,  not their reproductive apparatus. The Victorian Samuel Butler awarded the egg  overall priority when he said that a chicken is just an egg’s way of making another  egg. About one point, however, there is no dispute: eggs existed long before  chickens did. Ultimately, we owe our soufflés and sunny-sides-up to the invention  of sex.  The World Egg  In the beginning this world was nonexistent. It became existent. It  developed. It turned into an egg. It lay for the period of a year. It split  apart. One of the parts became silver, one gold.  That which was silver is this earth. That which was gold is the sky. That  which was the outer membrane is the mountains. That which was the  inner membrane is clouds and mist. What were the veins are the rivers.  What was the fluid within is the ocean.  What was born from the egg is the sun. When it was born, shouts and  hurrahs and all beings and all desires rose up toward it. Therefore at its  rise and at its every return, shouts and hurrahs and all beings and all  desires rise up toward it.  —   Chandogya Upanishad , ca. 800   BCE  The Evolution of the Egg  Sharing DNA   Defined broadly, the egg is a kind of cell that is specialized for the
process of sexual reproduction, in which two parents contribute genes to the  making of a new individual. The first living things were single cells and reproduced  on their own, each cell simply making a copy of its DNA and then dividing itself  into two cells. The first sexual organisms, probably single-celled algae, paired up  and exchanged DNA with each other before dividing — a mixing that greatly  facilitated genetic change. Specialized egg and sperm cells became necessary  around a billion years ago, when many-celled organisms evolved and this simple  transfer of DNA was no longer possible.  What makes an egg an egg? Of the two reproductive cells, it’s the larger, less  mobile one. It receives the sperm cell, accommodates the joining of the two gene  sets, and then divides and differentiates into the embryonic organism. It also  provides food for at least the initial stages of this growth. This is why eggs are so  nutritious: Like milk and like plant seeds, they are actually designed to be foods, to  support new creatures until they are able to fend for themselves.  Improving the Package   The first animal eggs were released into the equable  oceans, where their outer membrane could be simple and their food supply  minimal. Some 300 million years ago, the earliest fully landdwelling animals, the  reptiles, developed a self-contained egg with a leathery skin that slowed fatal  water loss, and with enough food to support prolonged embryonic development  into a fully formed animal. The eggs of birds, animals that arose some 100 million  years later, are a refined version of the primitive reptile egg. Their hard, mineralized  shell is impermeable enough that the embryo can develop in the driest habitats;  and they contain an array of antimicrobial defenses. These developments made  the bird egg into an ideal human food. It contains a sizeable and balanced portion  of animal nutrients; and it’s so well packaged that it keeps for weeks with little or  no care.  The Chicken, from Jungle to Barnyard  Eggs, then, are nearly a billion years older than the oldest birds. The genus   Gallus,  to which the chicken belongs, is a mere 8 million years old, and   Gallus gallus,   the  chicken species, has been around only for the last 3 to 4 million years.  For a barnyard commoner, the chicken has a surprisingly exotic background. Its  immediate ancestors were jungle fowl native to tropical and subtropical Southeast  Asia and India. The chicken more or less as we know it was probably domesticated
in Southeast Asia before 7500   BCE , which is when larger-than-wild bones date from  in Chinese finds far north of the jungle fowl’s current range. By 1500   BCE   chickens  had found their way to Sumer and Egypt, and they arrived around 800   BCE   in  Greece, where they became known as “Persian birds,” and where quail were the  primary source of eggs.  The Domestic Egg   We’ll never know exactly why chickens were domesticated, but  they may well have been valued more for their prolific egg production than for  their meat. Some birds will lay only a set number of eggs at a time, no matter what  happens to the eggs. Others, including the chicken, will lay until they accumulate a  certain number in the nest. If an egg is taken by a predator, the hen will lay another  to replace it — and may do so indefinitely. Over a lifetime, these “indeterminate  layers” will produce many more eggs than the “determinate” layers. Wild Indian  jungle fowl lay clutches of about twelve glossy, brown eggs a few times each year.  In industrial production — the ecological equivalent of unlimited food resources  combined with unrelenting predation — their domesticated cousins will lay an  egg a day for a year or more.  Food Words:   Egg   and   Yolk  Egg   comes from an Indo-European root meaning “bird.”  The brusque-sounding   yolk   is rich in overtones of light and life. It comes from  the Old English for “yellow,” whose Greek cousin meant “yellow-green,” the  color of new plant growth. Both the Old English and the Greek derive  ultimately from an Indo-European root meaning “to gleam, to glimmer.”   The  same root gave us   glow   and   gold.  Cooked Eggs   Doubtless bird eggs have been roasted ever since humans mastered  fire; in   As You Like It   Shakespeare has Touchstone call Corin “damned, like an ill-  roasted egg, all on one side.” Salting and pickling eggs are ancient treatments that  preserved the spring’s bounty for use throughout the year. We know from the  recipes of Apicius that the Romans ate   ova frixa, elixa, et hapala   — fried, boiled, and  “soft” eggs — and the   patina,   which could be a savory quiche or a sweet custard.  By medieval times, the French were sophisticated omelet makers and the English
were dressing poached eggs with the sauce that would come to be called   crème  anglaise.   Savory yolk-based sauces and egg-white foams developed over the next  three centuries. By around 1900, Escoffier had a repertoire of more than 300 egg  dishes, and in his   Gastronomie Pratique,   Ali Bab gave a playful recipe for a  “Symphony of Eggs” — a four-egg omelet containing two chopped hard-cooked  and six whole poached eggs.  Roman Custards, Savory and Sweet  Patina of Soles  Beat and clean the soles and put in patina [a shallow pan]. Throw in oil,  liquamen [fish sauce], wine. While the dish cooks, pound and rub  pepper, lovage, oregano; pour in some of the cooking liquid, add raw  eggs, and make into one mass. Pour over the soles and cook on a slow  fire. When the dish has come together, sprinkle with pepper and serve.  “Cheese” Patina  Measure out enough milk for your pan, mix with honey as for other  milk dishes, add five eggs for [a pint], three for [a half-pint]. Mix them in  the milk until they make one mass, strain into a dish from Cuma, and  cook over a slow fire. When it is ready, sprinkle with pepper and serve.  — from Apicius, first few centuries   CE  The Industrial Egg  Hen Fever   The chicken underwent more evolutionary change between 1850 and  1900 than it had in its entire lifetime as a species, and under an unusual selection  pressure: the fascination of Europeans and Americans with the exotic East. A  political opening between England and China brought specimens of previously  unknown Chinese breeds, the large, showy Cochins, to the West. These spectacular  birds, so different from the run of the barnyard, touched off a chicken-breeding  craze comparable to the Dutch tulip mania of the 17th century. During this “hen  fever,” as one observer of the American scene called it, poultry shows were very
popular and hundreds of new breeds were developed.  Ordinary farm stock was also improved. Just a few decades after its arrival in the  United States from Tuscany around 1830, descendents of the White Leghorn  emerged as the champion layers. Versions of the Cornish, itself the offshoot of  Asiatic fighting breeds, were deemed the best meat birds; and the Plymouth Rock  and Rhode Island Red, whose eggs are brown, were bred as dual-purpose chickens.  As interest in the show birds faded, the egg and meat breeds became ever more  dominant. Today, an egg or meat chicken is usually the product of four purebred  grandparents. Nearly all of the diversity generated in the 1800s has disappeared.  Among   industrialized   countries,   only   France   and   Australia   have   remained  independent of the handful of multinational corporations that provide laying stock  to the egg industry.  Mass Production   The 20th century saw the general farm lose its poultry shed to  the poultry farm or ranch, which has in turn been split up into separate hatcheries  and meat and egg factories. Economies of scale dictate that production units be as  large as possible — one caretaker can manage a flock of 100,000, and many  ranches now have a million or more laying hens. Today’s typical layer is born in an  incubator, eats a diet that originates largely in the laboratory, lives and lays on wire  and under lights for about a year, and produces between 250 and 290 eggs. As  Page Smith and Charles Daniel put it in their   Chicken Book,   the chicken is no longer  “a lively creature but merely an element in an industrial process whose product [is]  the egg.”  Benefits and Costs   The industrialization of the chicken has brought benefits, and  these shouldn’t be underestimated. A pound of broiler can now be produced from  less than two pounds of feed, a pound of eggs from less than three, so both  chickens and eggs are bargains among animal foods. Egg quality has also  improved. City and country dwellers alike enjoy fresher, more uniform eggs than  formerly, when small-farm hens ran free and laid in odd places, and when spring  eggs were stored until winter in limewater or waterglass (see p. 115). Refrigeration  alone has made a tremendous difference. Year-round laying (made possible by  controlled lighting and temperature), prompt gathering and cooling, and daily  shipping by rapid, refrigerated transport mean that good eggs deteriorate much  less between hen and cook than they did in the more relaxed, more humane past.  There are drawbacks to the industrial egg. While average quality has improved,
people who pay close attention to eggs say that flavor has suffered: that the  chicken’s natural, varied diet of grains, leaves, and bugs provides a richness that  the commercial soy and fish meals don’t. (This difference has proven hard to  document in taste tests; see p. 87.) In addition, mass husbandry has played a role in  the rising incidence of salmonella contamination. “Spent” hens are often recycled  into feed for the next generation of layers, so that salmonella infection is readily  spread by careless processing. Finally, there is a more difficult question: whether  we can enjoy good, cheap eggs more humanely, without reducing descendents of  the spirited jungle fowl to biological machines that never see the sun, scratch in  the dust, or have more than an inch or two to move.  Freer Range?   Enough people have become uncomfortable with the excesses of  industrialization, and willing to pay a substantial premium for their eggs, that  smaller-scale,   “free-range”   and   “organically   fed”   laying   flocks   have   made   a  comeback in the United States and Europe. Swiss law now requires that all hens in  that country have free access to the outdoors. The term “free-range” can be  misleading; it sometimes means only that the chickens live in a slightly larger cage  than usual, or have brief access to the outdoors. Still, with people eating fewer  eggs in the home, spending so little on those eggs, and paying more attention to  what they eat, the odds are good that this modest de-industrialization of the egg  will continue.  A Medieval Omelet and English Cream  Arboulastre   (An Omelet)  [First prepare mixed herbs, including rue, tansy, mint, sage, marjoram,  fennel, parsley, violet leaves, spinach, lettuce, clary, ginger.] Then have  seven eggs well beaten together, yolks and whites, and mix with the  herbs. Then divide in two and make two   allumelles,   which are fried in  the following manner. First you heat your frying pan well with oil,  butter, or whatever fat you like. When it is well heated, especially  toward the handle, mix and cast your eggs upon the pan, and turn  frequently with a paddle over and under; then throw some good grated  cheese on top. Know that it is done thus because if you mix the cheese
with the eggs and herbs, when you fry the   allumelle,   the cheese that is  underneath sticks to the pan…. And when your herbs are fried in the  pan, shape your   arboulastre   into a square or round form, and eat it  neither too hot nor too cold.  —   Le Ménagier de Paris , ca. 1390  Poche to Potage (Poached Eggs in Crème Anglaise)  Take eggs and break them into boiling water, and let them seethe, and  when they are done take them out, and take milk and yolks of eggs,  and beat them well together, and put them in a pot; and add sugar or  honey, and color it with saffron, and let it seethe; and at the first boil  take it off, and cast therein powder of ginger, and dress the cooked eggs  in dishes, and pour the pottage above, and serve it forth.  — from a manuscript published in   Antiquitates Culinariae,   1791 (ca. 1400)  Egg Biology and Chemistry  How the Hen Makes an Egg  The egg is so familiar that we seldom remember to marvel at its making. All  animals work hard at the business of reproduction, but the hen does more than  most. Her “reproductive effort,” defined as the fraction of body weight that an  animal deposits daily in her potential offspring, is 100 times greater than a  human’s. Each egg is about 3% of the hen’s weight, so in a year of laying, she  converts about eight times her body weight into eggs. A quarter of her daily  energy expenditure goes toward egg-making; a duck puts in half.  The chicken egg begins with the pinhead-sized white disc that we see riding atop  the yellow yolk. This is the business end of the egg, the living germ cell that  contains the hen’s chromosomes. A hen is born with several thousand microscopic  germ cells in her single ovary.  Making the Yolk   As the hen grows, her germ cells gradually reach a few  millimeters in diameter, and after two or three months accumulate a white,
primordial form of yolk inside their thin surrounding membrane. (The white yolk  can be seen in a hard-cooked egg; see box, p. 74.) When the hen reaches laying  age at between four and six months, the egg cells begin to mature, with different  cells at different stages at any given time. Full maturation takes about ten weeks.  During the tenth, the germ cell rapidly accumulates yellow yolk, mostly fats and  proteins, which is synthesized in the hen’s liver. Its color depends on the pigments  in the hen’s feed; a diet rich in corn or alfalfa makes a deeper yellow. If the hen  feeds only once or twice a day, her yolk will show distinct layers of dark and light.  In the end, the yolk comes to dwarf the germ cell, containing as it must the  provisions for 21 days during which the chick will develop on its own.  Making the White   The rest of the egg provides both nourishment and protective  housing for the germ cell. Its construction takes about 25 hours and begins when  the ovary releases the completed yolk. The yolk is then gripped by the funnel-  shaped opening of the oviduct, a tube 2–3 feet/0.6–0.9 meter long. If the hen has  mated in recent days, there will be sperm stored in a “nest” at the upper end of the  oviduct, and one will fuse with the egg cell. Fertilized or not — and most eggs are  not — the yolk spends two to three hours slowly passing down the upper end of  the oviduct. Protein-secreting cells in the oviduct lining add a thickening layer to  its membrane, and then coat it with about half the final volume of the egg white,  or   albumen   (from the Latin   albus,   meaning “white”). They apply this portion of  albumen in four layers that are alternately thick and thin in consistency.  The first thick layer of albumen protein is twisted by spiraling grooves in the  oviduct wall to form the   chalazae   (from the Greek for “small lump,”   “hailstone”), two  dense, slightly elastic cords which anchor the yolk to the ends of the shell and  allow it to rotate while suspending it in the middle of the egg. This system keeps as  much cushioning albumen as possible between the embryo and the shell, and  prevents premature contact between shell and embryo, which could distort the  embryo’s development.  Membranes, Water, and Shell   Once the albumen proteins have been applied to  the yolk, it spends an hour in the next section of the oviduct being loosely  enclosed in two tough, antimicrobial protein membranes that are attached to each  other everywhere except for one end, where the air pocket will later develop to  supply the hatching chick with its first gulps of air. Then comes a long stretch — 19  or 20 hours — in the 2-inch-/5-cm-long uterus, or shell gland. For five hours, cells  in the uterus wall pump water and salts through the membranes and into the
albumen and “plump” the egg to its full volume. When the membranes are taut, the  uterine lining secretes calcium carbonate and protein to form the shell, a process  that takes about 14 hours. Since the embryo needs air, the shell is riddled  (especially at the blunt end) with some 10,000 pores that add up to a hole about 2  mm in diameter.  Germ-Side Up: Primordial Yolk  Have you ever noticed that when you crack open a raw egg, the germ cell —  the pinhead-sized white disc that carries the hen’s DNA — usually comes to  the top of the yolk? It does so because the channel of primordial white yolk  below it is less dense than the yellow yolk — so the egg cell’s side of the yolk  is lighter, and rises. In the intact egg, the chalazae allow the germ cell to  return to the top whenever the hen rearranges her eggs.  That persistent bit of uncoagulated yolk at the center of a hard-cooked egg is  primordial white yolk, especially rich in iron, which the hen deposits in its  eggs when they’re barely a quarter-inch/6 mm in diameter.  Cuticle and Color   The hen’s finishing touch on her egg is a thin proteinaceous  cuticle. This coating initially plugs up the pores to slow water loss and block the  entry of bacteria, but gradually fractures to allow the chick to get enough oxygen.  Along   with   the   cuticle   comes   color,   in   the   form   of   chemical   relatives   of  hemoglobin. Egg color is determined by the hen’s genetic background, and has no  relation to the egg’s taste or nutritional value. Leghorns lay very lightly pigmented  “white” eggs. Brown eggs are produced by breeds that were originally dual-  purpose egg and meat birds, including Rhode Island Reds and Plymouth Rocks;  New   Hampshire   and   Australorps   hens   were   bred   for   intensive   brown-egg  production. Chinese Cochin hens paint their eggs with fine yellow dots. Thanks to  a dominant trait unknown in any other wild or domestic chickens, the rare Chilean  Araucana lays blue eggs. Crosses between Araucanas and brown-egg breeds make  both blue and brown pigments and thus green shells.  The completed egg is expelled blunt end first about 25 hours after leaving the  ovary. As the egg cools down from the hen’s high body temperature (106ºF/41ºC),
its contents shrink slightly. This contraction pulls the inner shell membrane away  from its outer partner at the blunt end and thereby forms the air space, whose size  is an indicator of egg freshness (p. 81).  The Yolk  The yolk accounts for just over a third of a shelled egg’s weight, and its biological  purpose is almost exclusively nutritive. It carries three-quarters of the calories and  most of the iron, thiamin, and vitamin A of the egg as a whole. The yolk’s yellow  color comes not from the vitamin-A precursor beta-carotene, the orange pigment  in carrots and other plant foods, but from plant pigments called xanthophylls (p.  267), which the hen obtains mainly from alfalfa and corn feeds. Producers may  supplement the feeds with marigold petals and other additives to deepen the  color. Duck yolks owe their deeper orange color both to beta-carotene and to the  reddish pigment canthaxanthin, which wild ducks obtain from small water insects  and crustaceans, egg-laying ducks from feed supplements. One minor component  of the yolk that can cause a major culinary disaster is the starch-digesting enzyme  amylase, which has liquefied many a normal-looking pie filling from within (see p.  98).  Spheres Within Spheres   That’s a yolk by numbers and nutrients. But there’s a lot  more to this concentrated pool of the sun’s rays. Its structure is intricate, much like  a Chinese set of nested spheres carved from a single block of jade. We see the first  layer of structure whenever we cut into a hard-cooked egg. Where heat gels the  white into a smooth, continuous mass, the yolk sets into a crumbly mass of  separate particles. The intact yolk turns out to consist of spherical compartments  about a tenth of a millimeter across, each contained within a flexible membrane,  and so tightly packed that they’re distorted into flat-sided shapes (much like the oil  droplets that egg yolk stabilizes in mayonnaise; see p. 626). When a yolk is cooked  intact, these spheres   harden   into individual particles and give the yolk its  characteristic crumbly texture. But break the yolk out before you cook it so that the  spheres can move freely, and it becomes less granular.
The structure of the hen’s egg. The egg white provides physical and chemical  protection for the living germ cell, and protein and water for its development into a  chick. The yolk is rich in fats, proteins, vitamins and minerals. The layering of color in  the yolk is caused by the hen’s periodic ingestion of grain and its fat-soluble pigments.  What’s inside these large yolk spheres? Though we think of the yolk as rich and  fatty, in fact its chambers are filled mostly with water. Floating in that water are  sub-spheres about one hundredth the size of the spheres. The subspheres are too  small to see with the naked eye or to be broken up by a kitchen beating. But they  can be seen indirectly, and disrupted chemically. Yolk is cloudy because these  subspheres are large enough to deflect light and prevent it from passing through  the yolk directly. Add a pinch of salt to a yolk (as you do when making mayonnaise)  and you’ll see the yolk become simultaneously clearer and thicker. Salt breaks  apart the light-deflecting sub-spheres into components that are too small to  deflect light — and so the yolk clears up.  And what do the subspheres contain? A mixture similar to the liquid that  surrounds them in the spheres. First, water. Dissolved in the water, proteins: hen  blood proteins outside the subspheres; inside, phosphorus-rich proteins that bind  up most of the egg’s iron supply. And suspended in the water,   sub   subspheres  about 40 times smaller than the subspheres, some of which turn out to be familiar  from the human body. The subsubspheres are aggregates of four different kinds of  molecules: a core of fat surrounded by a protective shell of protein, cholesterol,  and phospholipid, a hybrid fat-water mediator which in the egg is mainly lecithin.  Most of these subsubspheres are “low-density lipoproteins,” or LDLs — essentially
the same particles that we keep track of in our own blood to monitor our  cholesterol levels.  Stand back from all these spheres within spheres and the picture becomes less  dizzying. The yolk is a bag of water that contains free-floating proteins and protein-  fat-cholesterol-lecithin aggregates — and these lipoprotein aggregates are what  give the yolk its remarkable capacities for emulsifying and enriching.  An egg yolk granule as seen through the electron microscope. It has fallen apart after  immersion   in   a   salt   solution,   and   is   an   intricate   assembly   of   proteins,   fats,  phospholipids, and cholesterol.  The White  Next to the yolk’s riches, the white seems colorless and bland. It accounts for nearly  two thirds of the egg’s shelled weight, but nearly 90% of that is water. The rest is  protein, with only traces of minerals, fatty material, vitamins (riboflavin gives the  raw white a slightly yellow-green cast) and glucose. The quarter-gram of glucose,  which is essential for the embryo’s early growth, isn’t enough to sweeten the white,  though in such preparations as long-cooked eggs (p. 89) and thousand-year  preserved eggs (p. 116) it’s sufficient to turn the white a dramatic brown. The  white’s structural interest is limited to the fact that it comes in two consistencies,  thick and thin, with the yolk cords being a twisted version of the thick.  Protective Proteins   Pale though it is, the egg white has surprising depths. Of  course it supplies the developing embryo with essential water and protein. But
biochemical studies have revealed that the albumen proteins are not mere baby  food. At least four of the proteins block the action of digestive enzymes. At least  three bind tightly to vitamins, which prevents them from being useful to other  creatures, and one does the same for iron, an essential mineral for bacteria and  animals alike. One protein inhibits the reproduction of viruses, and another digests  the cell walls of bacteria. In sum, the egg white is first of all a chemical shield  against infection and predation, forged during millions of years of battling  between the nourishing egg and a world of hungry microbes and animals.  A few of the dozen or so egg-white proteins are especially important for the cook  and worth knowing by name.  •   Ovomucin   accounts for less than 2% of the total albumen protein, but has by  far the greatest influence on the fresh egg’s commercial and culinary value. It  makes fried and poached eggs compact and attractive by making the thick  white thick — 40 times more so than the thin white. Ovomucin somehow  pulls together the otherwise soupy protein solution into an organized  structure; gently tear a piece of hard-cooked white and you can see its  laminations along the edge of the tear. This structure is thought to help  cushion the yolk and slow the penetration of microbes through the white. It  gradually disintegrates with age in the raw egg, which may make the white  more digestible for the developing chick, and certainly makes the egg less  useful for the cook.  •   Ovalbumin , the most plentiful egg protein, was the first protein ever  crystallized in the laboratory (in 1890), yet its natural function remains  unclear. It seems related to a family of proteins that inhibit protein-digesting  enzymes, and may be a mainly nutritional relic of ancient battles against a  now-extinct microbe. It is the only egg protein to have reactive sulfur  groups, which make decisive contributions to the flavor, texture, and color of  cooked   eggs.   Interestingly   for   the   cook,   ovalbumin’s   heat   resistance  increases for several days after laying, so that very fresh eggs need less  cooking for a given consistency than eggs a few days old.  •   Ovotransferrin   holds tightly onto iron atoms to prevent bacteria from using  them, and to transport iron in the developing chick’s body. It is the first  protein to coagulate when an egg is heated, and so determines the  temperature at which eggs set. The setting temperature is higher for whole  eggs than for egg white, because ovotransferrin becomes more stable and
resistant to coagulation when it binds the abundant iron in the yolk. The  color of ovotransferrin changes when it latches onto metals, which is why  egg whites whipped in a copper bowl turn golden; you can also make a pink  meringue by dosing the whites with a pinch of ground-up iron supplement.  The Proteins in Egg White  Protein  Percent of  Total Albumen  Protein   Natural Functions  Culinary  Properties  Ovalbumin   54   Nourishment; blocks  digestive enzymes?  Sets when heated  to 180ºF/80ºC  Ovotransferrin   12   Binds iron   Sets when heated  to 140ºF/60ºC or  foamed  Ovomucoid   11   Blocks digestive  enzymes  ?  Globulins   8   Plug defects in  membranes, shell?  Sets when heated  to 170ºF/75ºC;  stabilizes foam  Lysozyme   3.5   Enzyme that digests  bacterial cell walls  Enzyme that  digests bacterial  cell walls  Ovomucin   1.5   Thickens albumen;  inhibits viruses  Stabilizes foam  Avidin   0.06   Binds vitamin (biotin)   ?  Others   10   Bind vitamins (2+);  block digestive  enzymes (3+)…  ?
The Nutritional Value of Eggs  An egg contains everything you need to make a chick, all the ingredients and  chemical machinery and fuel. That fact is its strength as a food. Cooked — to  neutralize the protective antinutritional proteins — the egg is one of the most  nutritious foods we have. (Raw, it causes laboratory animals to   lose   weight.) It’s  unmatched as a balanced source of the amino acids necessary for animal life; it  includes a plentiful supply of linoleic acid, a polyunsaturated fatty acid that’s  essential in the human diet, as well as of several minerals, most vitamins, and two  plant pigments, lutein and zeaxanthin, that are especially valuable antioxidants (p.  255). The egg is a rich package.  Cholesterol in Eggs   Too   rich for our blood, it’s been thought: a belief that  contributed to the steep drop in U.S. egg consumption beginning around 1950.  Among our common foods, the egg is the richest source of cholesterol. One large  egg contains around 215 milligrams, while an equivalent portion of meat has  about 50.  Why is there so much cholesterol in the egg? Because it’s an essential component  of animal cell membranes, of which the chicken embryo must construct many  millions before it hatches. There is some variability in the cholesterol contents of  different breeds, and the hen’s diet has some effect — a feed high in sitosterol, a  vegetable relative of cholesterol, brings egg cholesterol down by a third. But these  reductions still leave egg yolk way ahead of most other foods.  Since high blood cholesterol does increase the risk of heart disease, many medical  associations have long recommended limiting our yolk consumption to two or  three per week. However, recent studies of moderate eaters have shown that egg  consumption has little influence on blood cholesterol. This is partly because blood  cholesterol is raised far more powerfully by saturated fats in the diet than by  cholesterol itself, and most of the fat in egg yolk is unsaturated. It also appears that  other fatty substances in the yolk, the phospholipids, interfere with our absorption  of yolk cholesterol. So there no longer seems to be any reason to bother counting  our weekly yolks. Of course, eggs shouldn’t displace positively heart-protective  fruits and vegetables from the diet; and on a strict regimen to deal with serious  heart disease or obesity, it may make sense to avoid egg yolks along with similarly  fatty animal foods. Better than 60% of the calories in a whole egg come from fat, a  third of them from saturated fat.
The Composition of a U.S. Large Egg  A shelled U.S. Large egg weighs 2 ounces, or 55 grams. In the following table,  all weights are given in grams (g) or thousandths of a gram (mg). Fat accounts  for about 60% of the calories in an egg, saturated fat around 20%.  Whole Egg   Egg White   Egg Yolk  Weight   55 g   38 g   17 g  Protein   6.6 g   3.9 g   2.7 g  Carbohydrate   0.6 g   0.3 g   0.3 g  Fat   6 g   0   6 g  Monounsaturated   2.5 g   0   2.5 g  Polyunsaturated   0.7 g   0   0.7 g  Saturated   2 g   0   2 g  Cholesterol   213 mg   0   213 mg  Sodium   71 mg   62 mg   9 mg  Calories   84   20   64  Egg Substitutes   Largely impelled by the public desire for cholesterol-free eggs,  food manufacturers have come up with formulations that imitate whole beaten  eggs, and can be cooked into scrambled eggs or omelets or used in baking. These  products consist of genuine egg whites mixed with an imitation of the yolk, which  is usually made from vegetable oil, milk solids, gums that provide a thick  consistency, as well as colorings, flavorings, and vitamin and mineral supplements.  Fertilized Eggs   Despite folklore to the contrary, there is no detectable nutritional  difference between unfertilized and fertilized eggs. By the time a fertilized egg is  laid, the single germ cell has divided into tens of thousands of cells, but its  diameter has only grown from 3.5 millimeters to 4.5, and any biochemical changes  are negligible. Refrigerated storage prevents any further growth or development.  In the U.S. grading system, any significant development of the egg — from minute  blood   vessels   (which   appear   after   two   to   three   days   of   incubation)   to   a  recognizable embryo — is considered a major defect, and automatically puts it in
the “inedible” category. Of course this is a cultural judgment. In China and the  Philippines, for example, duck eggs containing two- to three-week embryos are  boiled and eaten, in part for their supposed contribution to virility. Because  embryos obtain some nourishment from the shell, these duck embryos do contain  more calcium than the eggs that they developed from.  Egg Allergies   Eggs are one of the commonest foods to which people develop  food allergies. Portions of the major egg-white protein ovalbumin appear to be the  usual culprits. The immune system of sensitive people interprets these parts of  ovalbumin to be a threat, and mounts a massive and self-destructive defense that  can take the form of fatal shock. Since a sensitivity to egg white often forms in  early life, pediatricians commonly recommend that children not eat egg whites  until after the age of one. Egg yolks are far less allergenic and can safely be eaten  by nearly all infants.  Egg Quality, Handling, and Safety  What is a good egg? An intact, uncontaminated egg with a strong shell; a firm yolk  and yolk membrane, which prevents the yolk from breaking and mixing with the  white; and a high proportion of cohesive, jellylike thick white compared to runny  thin white.  And what makes a good egg? Above all, a good hen: a hen of a select laying breed  that is healthy and not approaching the end of a laying year, when shells and  whites deteriorate (this stage is shortened by restricting the hen’s food, which  induces her to molt and reset her biological clock). A nutritious feed, free of  contaminants, and without ingredients (fish meal, raw soy meal) that impart off-  flavors. And careful evaluation and handling once the egg leaves the hen.  In order to determine egg quality without actually breaking them, producers  candle   their eggs, or place them in front of a light bright enough to pass through  them and illuminate their contents. (Candle and eye were the original equipment;  today electric lights and scanners do the work automatically.) Candling readily  detects cracks in the shell, harmless but unappealing blood spots on the yolk (from  burst capillaries in the hen’s ovary or yolk sac), and “meat spots” in the whites  (either brown blood spots or tiny bits of tissue sloughed off from the oviduct wall),  and large air cells, all characteristics that relegate an egg to the lower grades. To  determine the condition of the yolk and white, the egg is quickly twirled. The yolk’s
shadow will remain indistinct if its membrane is strong enough and the white thick  enough to have kept it from getting close to the shell. If the yolk is easy to see,  then it’s too easily deformed or mobile, and the egg is of lower quality.  Egg Grades  Eggs sold in stores are usually (but not mandatorily) classified by United States  Department of Agriculture (USDA) grades. Egg grade has nothing to do with either  freshness or size, and is not a guarantee of egg quality in your kitchen. It’s an  approximate indication of the quality of the egg back at the ranch, at the time it  was collected. Because candling isn’t foolproof, USDA definitions allow several  eggs per carton to be below grade at the time of packing. Once the eggs have  arrived   in   stores,   the   below-grade   allowance   doubles,   because   egg   quality  naturally declines with time, and jostling and vibration during transport can cause  the white to thin out.  Generally, only the two top grades, AA and A, are seen in stores. If you’re going to  use eggs fairly soon and will be scrambling them or making a custard or pancakes,  then the higher grade isn’t worth the higher price. But if you go through eggs  slowly, or like your hard-boiled yolks well centered and your poached and fried  eggs neat and compact, or are planning to make a meringue, soufflé, or egg-  leavened cake, then you may be better off with the premium grade, with its thicker  white and a yolk membrane less likely to leak foam-lowering yolk into the white.  In any case, the quality of a carton of eggs depends mainly on how old they are.  Even Grade AA eggs eventually develop flat yolks and thin whites. So be sure to  check the sell-by date stamped on the carton (usually four weeks from the packing  date; sometimes the pack date itself is indicated by a single number from 1 to 365),  and choose the carton with the latest date. Fresh grade A eggs can be a better buy  than old grade AA.  Deterioration in Egg Quality  Designed as it was to protect itself for the duration of the chick’s development, the  egg is unique among our raw animal foods in its ability to remain edible for weeks,  as long as it’s kept intact and cool. Even so, the moment the egg leaves the hen, it  begins to deteriorate in important ways. There is a fundamental chemical change:  both the yolk and the white get more alkaline (less acidic) with time. This is
because the egg contains carbon dioxide, which takes the form of carbonic acid  when it’s dissolved in the white and yolk, but is slowly lost in its gaseous form  through the pores in the shell. The pH scale provides a measure of acidity and  alkalinity (p. 795). On the pH scale, the yolk rises from a slightly acidic pH of 6.0 to a  nearly neutral 6.6, while the albumen goes from a somewhat alkaline 7.7 to a very  alkaline 9.2 and sometimes higher.  This alkalinization of the white has highly visible consequences. Because albumen  proteins at the pH of a fresh egg tend to cluster in masses large enough to deflect  light rays, the white of a fresh egg is indeed cloudily white. In more alkaline  conditions these proteins repel each other rather than cluster, so the white of an  older egg tends to be clear, not cloudy. And the white gets progressively more  runny with time: the proportion of thick albumen to thin, initially about 60% to  40%, falls below 50–50.  The relatively minor change in yolk acidity is less important than a simple physical  change. The yolk starts out with more dissolved molecules than the white, and this  osmotic imbalance creates a natural pressure for water in the white to migrate  across the yolk membrane. At refrigerator temperatures, about 5 milligrams of  water cross into the yolk each day. This influx causes the yolk to swell, which  stretches and weakens the yolk membrane. And the added water thins the yolk  dramatically.  A Home Test   Finally, the egg as a whole also loses moisture through its porous  shell, so the contents of the egg shrink, and the air cell at the wide end expands.  Even an oil-coated egg in a humid refrigerator loses 4 milligrams of water to  evaporation each day. The cook can use this moisture loss to estimate the  freshness of an egg. A new egg with an air space less than   inch/3 mm deep is ⅛  denser than water and will sink to the bottom of a bowl of water. As an egg ages  and its air cell expands, it gets progressively less dense, and the wide end of the  egg rises higher and higher in the water. An egg that actually floats is very old and  should be discarded. Around 1750, the English cookbook OWNER Hannah Glasse  gave two ways of determining the freshness of an egg, an important talent at a  time when it might have been sitting for some time in an odd corner of the yard.  One is to feel how warm it is — probably less than reliable — but the second  indirectly assays the air cell: “[Another way] to know a good egg, is to put the egg  into a pan of cold water; the fresher the egg the sooner it will fall to the bottom; if  rotten, it will swim at the top.”
Three different grades of eggs. The AA egg has a high proportion of thick white and a  firm, rounded yolk. The A egg has a less thick albumen and a weaker yolk membrane,  so it spreads more when cracked into a pan. The B egg spreads even further, and its  yolk membrane is easily broken.  All of these trends are probably part of the normal development of the egg. The  increase in alkalinity makes the albumen even less hospitable to invading bacteria  and molds. The thinning of the albumen allows the yolk to rise and the embryo to  approach the shell, its early source of oxygen, and may make it easier for the  embryo to tap the shell’s calcium stores. A weaker yolk membrane could mean an  easier attachment to the shell membranes. And the larger air cell gives the chick  more oxygen for its first few breaths.  These changes may be good for the chick, but they’re mostly bad for the cook. A  thinner white is runnier in the pan; a flabby yolk membrane is more likely to break  when the egg is cracked open; and a large air cell means an irregular shape for a  whole hard-cooked egg. The only culinary benefit to an older egg is that it’s easier  to peel.  Handling and Storing Eggs  Producers handle eggs in ways that are meant to slow down the inevitable  deterioration in quality. Eggs are gathered as shortly after laying as possible and  immediately cooled. In the United States, they are then washed in warm water and  detergent to remove the thousands of bacteria deposited on the shell during its  passage through the hen’s cloacal opening. In the past, the washed eggs were  given a fresh coat of mineral oil to retard the loss of both CO 2   and moisture; today,  with most eggs getting to market just two days after laying and refrigerated  during shipping as well as storage, oiling is limited to long haul delivery routes.  Egg Storage at Home: Cold, Still, Sealed   Egg quality deteriorates as much in a  day at room temperature as in four days under refrigeration, and salmonella  bacteria (p. 83) multiply much faster at room temperature. So it’s best to buy your  eggs cold — out of the cooler, not off an open shelf — and keep them cold.
Agitation thins the white, so an inner refrigerator shelf is preferable to the door. An  airtight container is better than the standard loose carton at slowing moisture loss  and the absorption of odors from other foods, although it accentuates the stale  flavor that gradually develops in the eggs themselves. Bought fresh and treated  with care, eggs should keep for several weeks in the shell. Once broken open,  they’re far more susceptible to spoilage and should be used promptly or frozen.  Storage Position  Does it make a difference what posture we store our eggs in? Studies in the  1950s found albumen quality to decline more slowly in eggs stored blunt end  up, and many states adopted this as the official position for packing egg  cartons. Studies in the 1960s and ’70s, when retailers began to stack the  cartons on their side to display the top label, found that posture doesn’t affect  albumen quality. Eggs that are stored on their sides give somewhat better-  centered yolks when hard-cooked, perhaps because both yolk cords fight  equally against gravity.  Freezing Eggs   Eggs can be stored frozen for several months in airtight containers.  Remove them from the shell, which would shatter, as its contents expand during  freezing. Allow some room for expansion in the containers, and press plastic wrap  onto the surface to prevent freezer burn (see p. 146) before covering with a lid.  Whites freeze fairly well; they lose only a modest amount of their foaming power.  Yolks and blended whole eggs, however, require special treatment. Frozen as is,  they thaw to a pasty consistency and can no longer be readily combined with  other ingredients. Thoroughly mixing the yolks with either salt, sugar, or acid will  prevent the yolk proteins from aggregating, and leaves the thawed mixture fluid  enough to mix. Yolks require 1 teaspoon salt, 1 tablespoon sugar, or 4 tablespoons  lemon juice per pint (respectively 5 gm, 15 gm, or 60 ml per half liter), and whole  eggs half these amounts. The equivalent of a U.S. Large egg is 3 tablespoons whole  egg, or 2 tablespoons white and 1 tablespoon yolk.
Egg Safety: The Salmonella Problem  Beginning around 1985, a hitherto minor bacterium called   Salmonella enteritidis  was identified as the culprit in growing numbers of food poisonings in continental  Europe, Scandinavia, Great Britain, and North America. Salmonella can cause  diarrhea or more serious chronic infection of other body organs. Most of these  outbreaks were associated with the consumption of raw or lightly cooked eggs.  Further investigation demonstrated that even intact, clean, Grade A eggs can  harbor large numbers of salmonella. In the early 1990s, U.S. health OWNERities  estimated that perhaps one egg in 10,000 carried this particularly virulent form of  salmonella. Thanks   to   a   variety   of   preventive   measures,   the   prevalence   of  contaminated eggs is now much lower — but it’s not zero.  Precautions   Until the day of the certified salmonella-free egg, all cooks should  know how to minimize the risk to themselves and to others, particularly the very  young and very old and people with weakened immune systems. The best way to  reduce the already small chance of using a badly contaminated egg is to buy only  refrigerated eggs and to speed them into your own refrigerator. Cook all egg  dishes sufficiently to kill any bacteria that might be present. This generally means  holding a temperature of at least 140ºF/60ºC for 5 minutes, or 160ºF/70ºC for 1  minute. Egg yolks will remain runny at the first temperature, but will harden at the  second. For many lightly cooked egg dishes — soft-boiled and poached eggs, for  example, and the yolk-based sauces — it’s possible to modify traditional recipes so  as to eliminate any salmonella that might be present (see box, p. 91).  Pasteurized Eggs   Three safer alternatives to fresh eggs are eggs pasteurized in the  shell, liquid eggs, and dried egg whites, all of which are available in supermarkets.  Intact eggs, blended whole eggs, or separated yolks and whites can all be  pasteurized by careful heating to temperatures between 130 and 140ºF/55–60ºC,  just below the range in which the egg proteins begin to coagulate. Dried egg  whites, which are reconstituted in water to make lightly cooked meringues, can be  pasteurized either before or after the drying. For most uses, these products do an  adequate job of replacing fresh eggs, though there is usually some loss in foaming  or emulsifying power and in stability to further heating; and heating and drying do  alter the mild egg flavor.
The Chemistry of Egg Cooking: How Eggs Get Hard  and Custards Thicken  The most commonplace procedures involving eggs are also some of the most  astonishing kitchen magic. You begin with a slippery, runny liquid, do nothing  more than add heat, and presto: the liquid rapidly stiffens into a solid that you can  cut with a knife. No other ingredient is as readily and drastically transformed as is  the egg. This is the key to its great versatility, both on its own and as a structure  builder in complex mixtures.  To what does the egg owe its constructive powers? The answer is simple: to its  proteins and their innate capacity to bond to each other.  Protein Coagulation  Pulling Proteins Together…   The raw egg begins as a liquid because both yolk  and white are essentially bags of water containing dispersed protein molecules,  with water molecules outnumbering proteins 1,000 to 1. As molecules go, a single  protein is huge. It consists of thousands of atoms bonded together into a long  chain. The chain is folded up into a compact wad whose shape is maintained by  bonds between neighboring folds of the chain. In the chemical environment of the  egg white, most of the protein molecules accumulate a negative electrical charge  and repel each other, while in the yolk, some proteins repel each other and some  are bound up in fat-protein packages. So the proteins in a raw egg mostly remain  compact and separate from one another as they float in the water.  When we heat the egg, all its molecules move faster and faster, collide with each  other harder and harder, and eventually begin to break the bonds that hold the  long protein chains in their compact, folded shape. The proteins unfold, tangle  with each other, and bond to each other into a kind of three-dimensional network.  There’s still much more water than protein, but the water is now divided up among  countless little pockets in the continuous protein network, so it can’t flow together  any more. The liquid egg thus becomes a moist solid. And because the large  protein molecules have clustered together densely enough to deflect light rays,  the initially transparent egg albumen becomes opaque.
How heat solidifies a liquid egg. Egg proteins begin as folded chains of amino acids  (left) . As they’re heated, their increased motion breaks some bonds, and the chains  unfold (center). The unfolded proteins then begin to bond to each other. This results in  a continuous meshwork of long molecules (right) , and a moist but solid egg.  The other treatments that cause egg to firm up — pickling them in acid or salt,  beating them into a foam — work in the same basic way, by overcoming the  proteins’ aloofness and encouraging them to bond to each other. When you  combine treatments — adding both acid and heat, for example — you can achieve  a whole range of consistencies and appearances, depending on the degree of  protein unfolding and bonding: from tough to delicate, dry to moist, lumpy to  jellylike, opaque to clear.  …But Not   Too   Close   In nearly every egg dish we make, we want to bond a liquid  — the egg alone or a mixture of eggs and other liquids — into a moist, delicate  solid. Overcooking either gives the dish a rubbery texture or else curdles it into a  mixture of hard lumps and watery liquid. Why? Because it bonds the proteins too  exclusively to each other and squeezes out the water from the protein network.  This is why it is that boiled or fried eggs lose water in the form of steam and get  rubbery, while mixtures of eggs and other liquids separate into two phases, the  added water and the solid lumps of protein.  The key to cooking egg dishes, then, is to avoid overcooking them and carrying
coagulation too far. Above all, this means temperature control. For tender,  succulent results, egg dishes should be cooked only just to the temperature at  which their proteins coagulate, which is always well below the boiling point,  212ºF/100ºC. The exact temperature depends on the mixture of ingredients, but is  usually higher than the temperature needed to kill bacteria and make the dish  safe. (Warm but still liquid yolk is another story; see p. 91). Generally, plain  undiluted eggs coagulate at the lowest temperatures. Egg white begins to thicken  at 145ºF/63ºC and becomes a tender solid when it reaches 150ºF/65ºC. This  solidification is due mainly to the most heat-sensitive protein, ovotransferrin, even  though it’s only 12% of the total protein. The major albumen protein, ovalbumin,  doesn’t coagulate until about 180ºF/80ºC, at which temperature the tender white  gets   much   firmer.   (The   last   albumen   protein   to   coagulate   is   heat-resistant  ovomucin, which is why the ovomucin-rich yolk cords remain liquid in scrambled  eggs long after the rest has set.) The yolk proteins begin to thicken at 150ºF and set  at 158ºF/70ºC, and whole egg — the yolk and white mixed together — sets around  165ºF/73ºC.  The   Effects   of   Added   Ingredients   Eggs   are   often   combined   with   other  ingredients, from a sprinkling of salt or lemon juice, to spoonsful of sugar or cream,  to cups of milk or brandy. Each of these additions affects egg-protein coagulation  and the dish’s consistency.  Milk, Cream, and Sugar Dilute, Delay, and Tenderize   When we dilute eggs with  other liquids, we raise the temperature at which thickening begins. Dilution  surrounds the protein molecules with many more water molecules, and the  proteins must be hotter and moving around more rapidly in order to find and  bond   to   each   other   at   a   noticeable   rate.   Sugar   also   raises   the   thickening  temperature, and for the same reason: its molecules dilute the proteins. A  tablespoon of sugar surrounds each protein molecule in a one-egg dish with a  screen of several thousand sucrose molecules. Combine the diluting effects of  water, sugar, and milk fat, and a custard mix containing a cup of milk, a tablespoon  of sugar, and an egg begins to thicken not at 160ºF/70ºC, but at 175 or 180ºF/78–  80ºC. And because the protein network is stretched out into such a large volume  — in a custard, the proteins from a single egg have to embrace not three  tablespoons of liquid but 18 or 20! — the coagulum is far more delicate, and easily  disrupted by overheating. At the extreme, in a concoction like eggnog or the  Dutch brandy drink advocaat, the egg proteins are so diluted that they can’t
possibly accommodate all the liquid, and instead merely give it some body.  The dilution of egg proteins in a custard. Left: An egg is rich in proteins; when  unfolded by cooking, they are numerous enough to form a firm solid network. Center:  When mixed with milk or cream, whose proteins don’t coagulate with heat, the egg  proteins are greatly diluted. Right: When a custard mix is cooked, the egg proteins  unfold and form a solid meshwork, but that meshwork is open and fragile, and the  custard’s consistency is delicate.  Acids and Salt Tenderize   There’s no truth to the common saying that acidity and  salt “toughen” egg proteins. Acids and salt do pretty much the same thing to egg  proteins. They get the proteins together sooner, but they don’t let them get as  close   together. That is, acids and salt make eggs thicken and coagulate at a lower  cooking temperature, but actually produce a more tender texture.  The key to this seeming paradox is the negative electrical charge that most of the  egg proteins carry, and that tends to keep them at a distance from each other.  Acids — cream of tartar, lemon juice, or the juice of any fruit or vegetable — lower  the pH of the egg, and thus diminish the proteins’ mutually repelling negative  charge. Similarly, salt dissolves into positively and negatively charged ions that  cluster around the charged portions of the proteins and effectively neutralize  them. In both cases, the proteins no longer repel each other as strongly, and  therefore approach each other and bond together earlier in the cooking and  unfolding process, when they’re still mostly balled up and can’t intertwine and  bond with each other as tightly. In addition, coagulation of the yolk proteins and of  some albumen proteins depends on sulfur chemistry that is suppressed in acidic  conditions (see the discussion of egg foams, p. 103). So eggs end up more tender
when salted, and especially when acidified.  Cooks have known this for a long time. In Morocco, Paula Wolfert found that eggs  are often beaten with lemon juice before long cooking to prevent them from  becoming leathery; and Claudia Roden gives an Arab recipe for scrambled eggs  made unusually creamy with vinegar (the eggs’ alkalinity reduces the amount of  free, odorous acetic acid, so the flavor is surprisingly subtle). Eggs scrambled with  tart fruit juices were popular in 17th century France, and may have been the  ancestors of lemon curd.  Early Acid-Tenderized Eggs  Marmelades   or Scrambled Eggs and Verjus, Without Butter  Break four eggs, beat them, adjust with salt and four spoonsful of  verjus [sour grape juice], put the mix on the fire, and stir gently with a  silver spoon just until the eggs thicken enough, and then take them off  the fire and stir them a bit more as they thicken. One can make  scrambled eggs in the same way with lemon or orange juice…  —   Le Patissier françois,   ca. 1690  The Chemistry of Egg Flavor  Fresh eggs have a mild flavor that has proven difficult to analyze. The white  contributes the main sulfury note, the yolk a sweet, buttery quality. The aroma  produced by a given egg is slightest immediately after laying, and gets stronger  the longer it’s stored before cooking. In general, egg age and storage conditions  have a greater influence on flavor than the hen’s diet and freedom to range.  However, both diet and pedigree can have noticeable effects. Brown-egg breeds  are unable to metabolize an odorless component of rapeseed and soy meals  (choline), and their intestinal microbes then transform it into a fishy-tasting  molecule (triethylamine) that ends up in the eggs. Fish-meal feeds and certain feed  pesticides cause off-flavors. The unpredictable diet of truly free-range hens will  produce unpredictable eggs.
Something between 100 and 200 compounds have been identified in the aroma of  cooked eggs. The most characteristic is hydrogen sulfide, H 2 S. In large doses — in a  spoiled egg or industrial pollution — H 2 S is very unpleasant. In a cooked egg it  contributes the distinctively eggy note. It’s formed predominantly in the white,  when the albumen proteins begin to unfold and free their sulfur atoms for reaction  with other molecules, at temperatures above 140ºF/60ºC. The longer the albumen  spends at these temperatures, the stronger the sulfury aroma. Greater quantities of  H 2 S are produced when the egg is older and the pH higher (the highly alkaline  conditions in Chinese preserving methods, p. 116, also liberate copious amounts of  H 2 S). Added lemon juice or vinegar reduces H 2 S production and its aroma. Because  hydrogen sulfide is volatile, it escapes from cooked eggs during storage, so they  get milder with time. Small quantities of ammonia are also created during cooking  and make a subliminal contribution to egg flavor (but an overpowering one in  Chinese preserved eggs).  Basic Egg Dishes  Eggs Cooked in the Shell  “Boiling an egg” is often taken as a measure of minimal competence in cooking,  since you leave the egg safe in its shell and have only to keep track of the water  temperature and the time. Though we commonly speak of hard- and soft-boiled  eggs, boiling is not a good way to cook eggs. Turbulent water knocks the eggs  around and cracks shells, which allows albumen to leak out and overcook; and for  hard-cooked eggs, a water temperature way above the protein coagulation  temperature means that the outer layers of the white get rubbery while the yolk  cooks through. Soft-cooked eggs aren’t cooked long enough to suffer in the same  way, and should be cooked in barely bubbling water, just short of the boil. Hard-  cooked eggs should be cooked at a bubble-less simmer, between 180 and  190ºF/80–85ºC. Eggs in the shell can also be steamed, a technique that requires  the least water and the least energy and time to heat the water. Leaving the lid  slightly ajar on a gently bubbling steamer will reduce the effective cooking  temperature to something below the boil and produce a tenderer white.
Telling Cooked Eggs from Raw  It’s easy to tell whether an intact egg is raw or already cooked. Give it a spin  on its side. If it spins fast and smoothly, it’s cooked. If it seems balky and  wobbly, it’s raw — the liquid insides slip and slosh and resist the movement of  the solid shell.  Times and Textures   Cooking times for in-shell eggs are determined by the desired  texture   (they   also   depend   on   egg   size,   starting   temperature,   and   cooking  temperature; the times here are rough averages). There’s a continuum of eggs  cooked in the shell for different periods of time. The French   oeuf à la coque   (“from  the shell”) is cooked for only two or three minutes and remains semi-liquid  throughout. Coddled or “soft-boiled” eggs, cooked 3 to 5 minutes, have a barely  solid outer white, a milky inner white, and a warm yolk, and are spooned from the  shell. The less familiar mollet eggs (from the French   molle,   “soft”), cooked for 5 or 6  minutes, have a semi-liquid yolk but a sufficiently firm outer white that they can be  peeled and served whole.  Hard-cooked eggs are firm throughout after cooking for 10 to 15 minutes. At 10  minutes the yolk is still dark yellow, moist, and somewhat pasty; at 15, it’s light  yellow, dry, and granular. Hard-cooking is sometimes prolonged for hours to  heighten color and flavor (p. 89). Chinese tea eggs, for example, are simmered until  set, then gently cracked, and simmered for another hour or two in a mixture of tea,  salt, sugar, and flavorings to produce a marbled, aromatic, very firm white.  Hard-Cooked Eggs   A properly prepared hard-cooked egg is solid but tender, not  rubbery; its shell intact and easy to peel; its yolk well centered and not discolored;  its flavor delicate, not sulfurous. Good texture and flavor are obtained by taking  care not to overcook the eggs, which overcoagulates their proteins and generates  too much hydrogen sulfide. Any method that keeps the cooking temperature well  below the boil will help avoid overcooking, as will plunging the cooked eggs into  ice water. Gentle cooking also takes care of most shell and yolk problems — but  not all.  Easily Cracked and Not So Easily Peeled Shells   A shell that cracks during hard  cooking makes a mess and a sulfurous stink, while a shell that doesn’t peel away
cleanly makes an ugly, pockmarked egg. A traditional preventative measure for  both problems is to poke a pinhole in the wide end of the shell, but studies have  found that this doesn’t make much difference. The best way to avoid cracking is to  heat fresh eggs gently, without the turbulence of boiling water. On the other hand,  the best guarantee of easy peeling is to use old eggs! Difficult peeling is  characteristic of fresh eggs with a relatively low albumen pH, which somehow  causes the albumen to adhere to the inner shell membrane more strongly than it  coheres to itself. At the pH typical after several days of refrigeration, around 9.2,  the shell peels easily. If you end up with a carton of very fresh eggs and need to  cook them right away, you can add a half teaspoon of baking soda to a quart of  water to make the cooking water alkaline (though this intensifies the sulfury  flavor). It also helps to cook fresh eggs somewhat longer to make the white more  cohesive, and to allow the white to firm up in the refrigerator before peeling.  Off-Center Yolks and Flat-Bottomed Whites   Well-centered yolks for attractive  slices or stuffed halves are easiest to obtain from fresh, high-grade eggs with small  air cells and plenty of thick albumen. As eggs age, the albumen loses water and  becomes more dense, which makes the yolk rise. Industry studies have found that  you can increase the proportion of centered yolks somewhat by storing eggs on  their sides instead of their ends. Various cooking strategies have also been  suggested, including rotating the eggs around their long axis during the first  several minutes in the pot, and standing them on end. None of these is completely  reliable.  Green Yolks   The occasional green-gray discoloration on the surface of hard-  cooked yolks is a harmless compound of iron and sulfur, ferrous sulfide. It forms at  the interface of white and yolk because that’s where reactive sulfur from the  former comes into contact with the iron from the latter. The alkaline conditions in  the white favor the stripping of sulfur atoms from the albumen proteins when heat  unfolds them, and the sulfur reacts with iron in the surface layer of yolk to form  ferrous sulfide. The older the egg, the more alkaline the white, and the more  rapidly this reaction occurs. High temperatures and prolonged cooking produce  more ferrous sulfide.  Yolk greening can be minimized by using fresh eggs, by cooking them as briefly as  possible, and by cooling them rapidly after cooking.  Long -Cooked Eggs   An intriguing alternative to the standard hard-cooked egg is
the Middle Eastern   hamindas   (Hebrew) or   beid hamine   (Arabic), which are cooked  for anywhere from 6 to 18 hours. They derive from the Sephardic Sabbath mixed  stew (called   hamin,   from the Hebrew for “hot”), which was put together on Friday,  cooked slowly in the oven overnight, and served as a midday Sabbath meal. Eggs  included in the stew shell and all, or alternatively long-simmered in water, come  out with a stronger flavor and a striking, tan-colored white. During prolonged  heating in alkaline conditions, the quarter-gram of glucose sugar in the white  reacts with albumen protein to generate flavors and pigments typical of browned  foods (see the explanation of the Maillard reaction on p. 778). The white will be  very tender and the yolk creamy if the cooking temperature is kept in a very  narrow range, between 160 and 165ºF/71–74ºC.  Eggs and Fire  Another Way with Eggs (Roasting)  Turn fresh eggs carefully in warm ashes near the fire so that they cook  on all sides. When they begin to leak they are thought to be freshly  done, and so are served to guests. These are the best and are most  agreeably served.  Eggs on a Spit  Pierce eggs lengthwise with a well-heated spit and parch them over the  fire as if they were meat. They should be eaten hot. This is a stupid  invention and unsuitable and a cooks’ joke.  — Platina,   De honesta voluptate et valetudine,   1475  Eggs Cooked Out of the Shell  Baked, Shirred, en Cocotte   There are several ways of soft-cooking eggs that are  broken out of the shell and into a container, which might be a dish or a hollowed-  out fruit or vegetable. As is true of in-shell soft-cooked eggs, timing is of the  essence to avoid overcoagulation of the white and yolk proteins, and depends on  the nature and placement of the heat source. In the case of baked or shirred eggs,
the dish should be set on the middle rack to avoid overcooking the top or bottom  while the rest cooks through. Eggs   en cocotte   (“in the casserole”) are cooked in  dishes set in a pan of simmering water, either on the stovetop or in the oven. Here  the eggs are well buffered from the heat source, yet cook just as quickly as baked  eggs because water transfers heat more rapidly than the oven air.  Poached Eggs   A poached egg is a containerless, soft-cooked egg that generates  its own skin of coagulated protein in the first moments of cooking. Slid raw into a  pan of already simmering water — or cream, milk, wine, stock, soup, sauce, or  butter — it cooks for three to five minutes, until the white has set, but before the  yolk does.  The Problem of Untidy Whites   The tricky thing about poached eggs is getting  them to set into a smooth, compact shape. Usually the outer layer of thin white  spreads irregularly before it solidifies. It’s helpful to use fresh Grade AA eggs  shelled just before cooking, which have the largest proportion of thick white and  will spread the least, and water close to but not at the boil, which will coagulate  the outer white as quickly as possible without turbulence that would tease the thin  albumen all over the pan. Other conventional cookbook tips are not very effective.  Adding   salt   and   vinegar   to   the   cooking   water,   for   example,   does   speed  coagulation, but it also produces shreds and an irregular film over the egg surface.  An unconventional but effective way to improve the appearance of poached eggs  is simply to remove the runny white from the egg   before   poaching. Crack the egg  into a dish, then slide it into a large perforated spoon and let the thin white drain  away for a few seconds before sliding the egg into the pan.  Timing Poached Eggs by Levitation   There’s a professional method for poaching  eggs   that   also   makes   great   amateur   entertainment.   This   is   the   restaurant  technique in which eggs are cracked into boiling water in a tall stockpot, disappear  into the depths, and — as if by magic! — bob up to the surface again just when  they’re done: a handy way indeed to keep track of many eggs being cooked at  once. The trick is the use of vinegar and salt (at about ½ and 1 tablespoon  respectively for each quart of cooking water, 8 and 15g per liter) and keeping the  water at the boil. The vinegar reacts with bicarbonate in the thin white to form tiny  buoyant bubbles of carbon dioxide, which get trapped at the egg surface as its  proteins coagulate. The salt increases the density of the cooking liquid just enough  that the egg and three minutes’ worth of bubbles will float.
Fried Eggs   The containerless fried egg is even more prone to spreading than the  poached egg because it is heated only from below, so its white is slower to  coagulate. Fresh, high-grade eggs give the most compact shape, and straining off  the thin white also helps. The ideal pan temperature for a pale, tender fried egg is  around 250ºF/ 120ºC, when butter has finished sizzling but hasn’t yet browned, or  oil to which a drop of water has been added has stopped sputtering. At higher  temperatures, you lose tenderness but gain a more flavorsome, browned and crisp  surface. The top of the egg can be cooked by turning the egg over after a minute  or so, or by adding a teaspoon of water to the pan and covering it to trap the  resulting steam, or — as in the browned Chinese “coin-purse” egg — the egg can  be folded over onto itself when barely set, so that top and bottom are crisped but  the yolk remains protected and creamy.  Poached Threads  A kind of poached egg that was enjoyed in 17th century France and England,  and still is in modern China and Portugal, is egg yolk trailed in a thin stream  into hot syrup, then lifted out as sweet, delicate threads.  Scrambled Eggs   Scrambled eggs and omelets are made from yolks and whites  mixed together, and are therefore a good fate for fragile, runny lower-quality eggs.  These dishes frequently include other ingredients. Cream, butter, milk, water, or oil  (used in China) will dilute the egg proteins and produce a tenderer mass when the  eggs are carefully cooked; overheating, however, will cause some of the added  liquid to separate. Watery vegetables like mushrooms should be precooked to  prevent them from weeping into the eggs. Chopped herbs, vegetables, or meats  should be warm — not hot or cold — to avoid uneven heating of adjacent egg  proteins.  The Key to Scrambled Eggs: Slow Cooking   Scrambled eggs made in the usual  quick, offhand way are usually hard and forgettable. The key to moist scrambled  eggs is low heat and patience; they will take several minutes to cook. The eggs  should be added to the pan just as butter begins to bubble, or oil makes a water  drop dance gently. Texture is determined by how and when the eggs are
disturbed. Large, irregular curds result if the cook lets the bottom layer set for  some time before scraping to distribute the heat. Constant scraping and stirring  prevents the egg proteins at the bottom from setting into a separate, firm layer,  and produces a creamy, even mass of yolk and thin white punctuated with very  fine curds of thick white. Scrambled eggs should be removed from the pan while  still slightly underdone, since they will continue to thicken for some time with their  residual heat.  Omelets   If good scrambled eggs demand patience, a good omelet takes panache  — a two- or three-egg omelet cooks in less than a minute. Escoffier described the  omelet as scrambled eggs held together in a coagulated envelope, a skin of egg  heated past the moist, tender stage to the dry and tough, so that it has the  strength to contain and shape the rest. Its formation requires a hotter pan than do  evenly tender scrambled eggs. But a hot pan means fast cooking to avoid  overcooking.  An important key to a successful omelet is contained in the name of the dish,  which since the Middle Ages has gone through various forms —   alemette,  homelaicte, omelette   (the standard French) — and comes ultimately from the Latin  lamella,   “thin plate.” The volume of eggs and the pan diameter should be balanced  so that the mix forms a relatively   thin   layer; otherwise the scrambled mass will take  too long to cook and be hard to hold together. The usual recommendation is three  eggs in a medium-sized frying pan, which should have a well-seasoned or nonstick  surface so that the skin will come away from it cleanly.  The skin of an omelet can be formed either just at the end of the cooking, or right  from the beginning. The fastest technique is to scramble the eggs vigorously with  a spoon or fork in a hot pan until they begin to set, then push the curds into a  rough disk, let the bottom consolidate for a few seconds, shake the pan to release  the disk, and fold it onto itself. A more substantial and more uniform-looking skin  results if the eggs are left undisturbed for a while to allow the bottom surface to  set. The pan is then shaken periodically to free the skin from the pan while the still-  liquid portion alone is stirred until creamy, and the disk finally folded and slipped  onto a plate. Yet another way is to let the bottom of the mix set, then lift an edge  with the fork and tip the pan to let more of the liquid egg run underneath. This is  repeated until the top is no longer runny, and the mass then folded over.  An omelet with an especially light texture ( omelette soufflée ) is made by whipping  the eggs until they’re full of bubbles, or by whipping the separated whites into a
foam and folding them gently back into the mixture of yolks and flavorings. The  mix is poured into a heated pan and cooked in a moderate oven.  Safe Poached Eggs  The runny yolk in ordinary poached eggs hasn’t been heated enough to  eliminate any salmonella bacteria that might be present. To eliminate bacteria  while keeping the yolk soft, transfer the finished egg to a second large pan  full of water at 150ºF/65ºC, cover, and let sit for 15 minutes. Check the  thermometer every few minutes; if the water drops below 145ºF/63ºC, put it  back on the heat. If you want to cook the eggs a short time before serving  them, this hot-water bath is a useful alternative to chilling and then reheating.  Egg-Liquid Mixtures: Custards and Creams  Definitions  Eggs are mixed with other liquids across a tremendous range of proportions. One  tablespoon of cream will enrich a scrambled egg, while one beaten egg will  slightly thicken a pint of milk into an eggnog. Just about in the middle of this  range — at around 4 parts liquid to 1 part egg, or 1 cup/250 ml to 1 or 2 eggs —  are the custards and creams, dishes in which the egg proteins give substantial  body to otherwise thin liquids. These terms are often used interchangeably, which  obscures a useful distinction.  In this section I’ll use   custard   to mean a dish prepared and served in the same  container, often baked and therefore unstirred, so that it sets into a solid gel. The  custard family includes savory quiches and timbales as well as sweet flans, crèmes  caramels, pots de crème, crèmes brûlées, and cheesecakes.   Creams,   by contrast, are  auxiliary preparations, made from essentially the same mix as custards but stirred  continuously during stovetop cooking to produce a thickened but malleable, even  pourable mass. Pastry cooks in particular use crème anglaise (so-called “custard  cream”), pastry cream (crème pâtissière), and their relatives to coat or fill or
underlie a great variety of baked sweets.  Classically Smooth Scrambled Eggs  Oeufs brouillés au jus   (Scrambled Eggs with Meat Demiglace)  Break a dozen fresh eggs into a dish, beat them thoroughly, pass them  through a strainer into a casserole dish, add six ounces of Isigny butter  cut into small pieces, season with salt, white pepper, and grated  nutmeg; place on a moderate stove and whip gently with a little egg-  white whip. As soon as they begin to thicken remove the casserole from  the flame and continue to whip until the eggs form a light, smooth  cream. Then add a little chicken demiglace, as big as a nut of butter, cut  into pieces, return to the stove to finish the cooking, pour into a silver  casserole and garnish with croutons passed through nicely colored  butter.  — Antonin Carême,   L’Art de la cuisine française au 19ième siècle , 1835  Dilution Demands Delicacy  Nearly all the problems that arise in custard and cream making come from the fact  that the egg proteins are spread very thin by the other ingredients. Take the nearly  identical recipes for a typical sweet milk custard or a crème anglaise: 1 whole egg,  1 cup/250 ml milk, 2 tablespoons/30 gm sugar. The milk alone increases the  volume of the mix — which the proteins must span and knit together — by a  factor of 6! And each tablespoon of sugar surrounds every protein molecule in the  egg with several thousand sucrose molecules. Because the egg proteins are so  outnumbered by water and sugar molecules, the coagulation temperature in a  custard is between 10 and 20ºF higher than in the undiluted egg, between 175  and 185ºF/79–83ºC. And the protein network that does form is tender, tenuous,  and fragile. Exceed the coagulation range by just 5 or 10ºF and the network begins  to collapse, forming water-filled tunnels in the custard, grainy curds in the cream.  Gentle Heat   Many cooks have known the temptation to crank up the heat after a
custard has been in the oven for an hour with no sign of setting, or a cream has  been stirred and stirred with no sign of thickening. But there’s good reason to  resist. The gentler these dishes are heated, the greater the safety margin between  thickening and curdling. Turning up the heat is like accelerating on a wet road  while you’re looking for an unfamiliar driveway. You get to your destination faster,  but you may not be able to brake in time to avoid skidding past it. Chemical  reactions like coagulation develop momentum, and don’t stop the second you  turn off the heat. If the thickening proceeds too fast, you may not be able to detect  and stop it before it overshoots done and hits curdled. A curdled cream can often  be salvaged by straining out the lumps, but an overcooked custard is a loss.  Always Add Hot Ingredients to Cold   Careful heating is also important during  preparation of the mix. Most custard and cream mixes are made by scalding milk  or cream — quickly heating it just to the boil — and then stirring it into the  combined eggs and sugar. This technique heats the eggs gently but quickly to 140  or 150ºF, just 30 to 40ºF short of the setting temperature. Doing the reverse —  adding cold eggs to the hot milk — would immediately heat the first dribbles of  egg close to the boil and cause premature coagulation and curdling.  Though scalding was a form of insurance in times when milk quality was uncertain,  it can now be dispensed with in custard making — unless you need to flavor the  milk by infusing it with vanilla or coffee beans, citrus peel, or another solid  flavoring. A custard mixed cold has just as even a texture and sets almost as quickly  as a pre-scalded one. Pre-scalding the milk remains handy in making creams  because milk (or cream) can be boiled quickly with little attention from the cook,  while heating the milk-egg mix from room temperature requires a low flame and  constant stirring to prevent coagulation at the pan bottom.  Curdling Insurance: Starch in Custards and Creams   Flour or cornstarch can  protect against curdling in custards and creams, even if they’re cooked quickly  over direct heat and actually boil. (The same is true for egg-based sauces like  hollandaise; see p. 628.) The key is the gelation of the solid starch granules in these  materials. When heated to 175ºF/77ºC and above — right around the temperature  at which the egg proteins are bonding to each other — the granules absorb water,  swell up, and begin to leak their long starch molecules into the liquid. The swelling  granules slow protein binding by absorbing heat energy themselves, and the  dissolved starch molecules get in the proteins’ way and prevent them from  bonding to each other too intimately. Because they contain starch, both chocolate
and cocoa can also help stabilize custards and creams.  A full tablespoon/8g of flour per cup/250ml liquid (or 2 teaspoons/5g pure starch  in the form of cornstarch or arrowroot) is required to prevent curdling. The  disadvantage is that this proportion of starch also turns a creamily smooth dish  into a coarser, thicker one, and diminishes its flavor.  Green Eggs in the Chafing Dish  Scrambled eggs and omelets kept hot in a chafing dish or on a steam table  will sometimes develop green patches. This discoloration results from the  same reaction that turns hard-cooked yolks green (p. 89), and is encouraged  by the persistent high temperature and the increased alkalinity of the cooked  eggs (the rise is about half a pH unit). It can be prevented by including an  acidic ingredient in the egg mixture, around a half teaspoon/2 gm lemon  juice or vinegar per egg; half that amount will slow the discoloration and  affect the flavor less.  Custard Theory and Practice  In the West, custards are almost always made with milk or cream, but just about  any liquid will do as long as it contains some dissolved minerals. Mix an egg with a  cup of plain water and you get curdled egg floating in water; include a pinch of salt  and you get a coherent gel. Without minerals, the negatively charged, mutually  repelling protein molecules avoid each other as they unfold in the heat, and each  forms only a few bonds with a few others. With minerals, positively charged ions  cluster around the negatively charged proteins and provide a neutralizing shield,  which makes it possible for the proteins to unfold near each other and bond  extensively into a fine network. Meats are rich in minerals, and the Japanese make  savory custards,   chawan-mushi   (soft) and   tamago dofu   (firm), from both bonito and  chicken broths. Vegetable stocks also work.  Proportions   The consistency of a custard can be firm or soft, slick or creamy,  depending on its egg content. The greater the proportion of whole eggs or whites,
the firmer and glossier the custard. Extra yolks, or using yolks alone, will produce a  more tender, creamier effect. A custard to be served in the container it was cooked  in can be as soft as the cook desires. Those that are to be turned out of a container  for serving must be firm enough to stand on their own, which means that they  must contain either some egg whites or at least 3 yolks per cup/250 ml of liquid  (the LDL-bound yolk proteins are less efficient networkers than the free-floating  albumen proteins, so we need more of them to make a firm gel). The replacement  of some or all of the milk with cream reduces the proportion of eggs required for a  given firmness, since cream contains 20 to 40% less water and the egg proteins are  proportionally less diluted. Unmolding is easiest from a buttered ramekin, and  when the custards have been allowed to cool thoroughly; cooling firms protein  gels.  Custards that contain fruits or vegetables can turn out very uneven, with pockets  of fluid and curdling. (Usually this is undesirable, though the Japanese expect  chawan-mushi   to weep and treat it as a combination of custard and soup.) The  culprits are juices that leak out of the plant tissue, and fibrous particles, which  cause local overcoagulation of egg proteins. The juice leakage can be reduced by  precooking the fruit or vegetable, and including some flour in the mix to help bind  excess liquid and minimize overcoagulation. These dishes are best cooked very  gently and only until barely done.  Food Words:   Custard, Cream, Flan  The nomenclature for egg-milk mixtures has always been loose. The English  “custard” began as “croustade” in medieval times, and meant dishes served in  a crust — thus, for egg-milk combinations, usually baked and unstirred, and  so solid. Early English creams could be either liquid or solid, as could the  French   crèmes.   Those congealed past the point of creaminess became known  as   crèmes prises,   or “set creams.”  Flan,   a French word, comes from the late Latin for “flat cake.”  Cooking   Cooks   have   known   for   thousands   of   years   that   a   low   cooking  temperature provides the greatest safety margin for making custards: that is, it
gives us more time to recognize that the dish is properly done and remove it from  the heat, before it toughens and tunnels. Custards are usually baked in a moderate  oven with the protection of a water bath, which keeps the effective cooking  temperature below the boiling point. The actual temperature depends on the pan  material and whether and how the water bath is covered (see box). It’s a mistake to  cover the whole water bath, since this forces the water to the boil and makes it  more likely that the custards will be overcooked. The most gentle heating results  when the individual molds are set covered on a rack in an open, thin metal pan of  hot water.  Custard doneness can be judged by bumping the dish — the contents should  move only sluggishly — or by probing the interior with a toothpick or knife, which  should return without any mix clinging to it. When the proteins have coagulated  enough that the mix clings mostly to itself, the dish is done. Unless the custard  needs to be firm enough to unmold, it’s best taken from the oven while the center  is still slightly underdone and jiggly. The egg proteins continue to set somewhat  with the residual heat, and the custard will in any case be firmer once cooled to  serving temperature.  “Ribboning”   Yolks with Sugar  Cookbooks often assert the importance of beating yolks with sugar until they  lighten in color and thicken sufficiently to form a ribbon when trailed from a  spoon. This stage does not mark any critical change in the yolk components.  It’s simply a sign that much of the sugar has dissolved in the limited yolk  water (about half the volume of the yolks themselves), which makes the mix  viscous enough to pour thickly and retain air bubbles (the cause of the  whitening). Sugar grains are a convenient means for mixing the yolks and  albumen remnants thoroughly, but the quality of a cream or custard will not  suffer if you mix the yolks and sugar thoroughly but stop short of the ribbon.  Savory Custards: The Quiche   The quiche (a French version of the German   Kuchen,  “little cake”) can be thought of either as a savory custard or a close relative of the  omelet. It is a pie-shaped mixture of eggs and cream or milk that contains small
pieces of a vegetable, meat, or cheese. To make it firm enough to be cut into  wedges for serving, a quiche normally contains 2 whole eggs per cup/250 ml of  liquid, and is baked unprotected by a water bath, either alone or in a precooked  crust. The Italian   frittata   and Egyptian   eggah   are similar preparations that omit any  milk or cream.  Crème Caramel and Crème Brûlée   Crème caramel is a freestanding sweet custard  with a layer of moist caramel on top. It’s made by coating the bottom of the dish  with a layer of caramelized sugar (see p. 656) before the custard mix is poured in  and cooked. The caramel does harden and stick to the dish, but moisture from the  custard mix softens it, and the two layers become partly integrated. The custard is  turned out of the dish while still slightly warm and the caramel soft. If the custard  must be refrigerated before serving, leave it in the mold; the caramel can be  softened again by placing the dish in a shallow pan of hot water for a minute or  two before unmolding.  Crème brûlée (“burned cream”) is also a custard topped with caramel, but here the  caramel should be hard enough to shatter when rapped with a spoon. The trick is  to harden and brown the sugar topping without overcooking the custard. The  standard modern method is to bake the custard and then chill it for several hours,  so that the subsequent caramelizing step won’t overcook the egg proteins. The  hard crust is then made by coating the custard surface with granulated sugar, and  then melting and browning the sugar, either with a propane torch or by placing  the dish right under the broiler. The dishes are sometimes immersed in an ice-  water bath to protect the custard from a second cooking. From the time of its  invention in the 17th century until early in the 20th, crème brûlée was a stirred  cream, prepared on the stovetop by making a crème anglaise, pouring it into  dishes, and caramelizing the sugar topping with   a red-hot metal   plate, or  “salamander.”  First Recipes for Crème Brûlée, Crème Anglaise, and Crème Caramel  Massialot’s recipe for crème brûlée is the first I know of. The identical recipe in  the 1731 edition of his book is renamed “Crême a l’Angloise,” which may well  be the origin of that basic stirred cream. An English model for “English cream”
hasn’t yet been unearthed.  Crème brûlée  Take four or five egg yolks, according to the size of your platter. You mix  them well in a casserole with a good pinch of flour; and little by little  you pour in some milk, about [3 cups/750 ml]. Add a little stick  cinnamon, and chopped green citron peel…. Put on the stovetop and  stir continuously, taking care that your cream doesn’t stick to the  bottom. When it is well cooked, place a platter on the stove, pour the  cream onto it, and cook it again until you see it stick to the platter rim.  Then remove from the heat and sugar it well: take the fire iron, good  and red, and burn the cream so that it takes on a fine gold color.  — F. Massialot,   Le Cuisinier roial et bourgeois,   1692  A few decades later, Vincent La Chapelle plagiarized Massialot’s recipe for his  own version of crème brûlée, which comes close to the modern crème  caramel. La Chapelle copies Massialot word for word up to the point that the  cream is cooked on the stovetop. Then…  When the cream is well cooked, put a silver platter onto the hot stove  with some powdered sugar and a little water to dissolve it; and when  your sugar has colored, pour the cream on top; turn the sugar along  the platter rim onto the top of your cream, and serve at once.  — V. La Chapelle,   Le Cuisinier moderne,   1742  Cheesecake   We don’t ordinarily think of cheesecake as a custard, probably  because the presence of eggs is masked by the richness of the filling they bind  together, which is some combination of ricotta cheese, cream cheese, sour cream,  heavy cream, and butter. The proportions for cheesecake are similar to those for  other custards, approaching 1 egg per cup/250 ml of filling, though the greater  richness and tartness of the filling demand more sugar for balance, around 4  tablespoons per cup (60 gm per 250 ml) instead of 2. Flour or cornstarch is  sometimes included to stabilize the gel and, in the case of ricotta cheesecakes, to  absorb water that may be released from the fresh cheese.  The thick texture and high fat content of cheesecake filling necessitate more
delicate treatment than a standard custard. Instead of a preliminary cooking on  the stovetop, the sugar is first mixed into the cream ingredients, and the eggs then  incorporated along with other flavorings. The cool mix is poured into the pan  (often preceded by a crumb crust) and baked at a gentle 325ºF/163ºC, often in a  water bath. The last phase of cooking may take place with the heat off and the  oven door ajar, which smooths the transition between cooking and cooling.  The most common problem with cheesecakes is the development of depressions  and cracks in the surface, which result when the mix expands and rises during the  cooking, then shrinks and falls as it cools down. Rising is essential for soufflés and  sponge cakes, but it is antithetical to the dense richness of cheesecake. Four basic  strategies will minimize it. First, beat the ingredients slowly, gently, and only long  enough to obtain an even mix. Vigorous or long beating incorporates more air  bubbles that will fill with steam and expand during baking. Second, bake the  cheesecake slowly in a low oven. This will allow trapped air and steam to disperse  gradually and evenly. Third, don’t overbake. This will dry the filling and cause it to  shrink from moisture loss. Finally, cool the cheesecake gradually in the open oven.  Cooling causes any trapped air or steam to contract, and the more gradually this  happens, the more gently the cheesecake surface is pulled in.  The Surprising Science of Water Baths  Most cooks know that oven heat can be moderated with a water bath.  Though the oven may be at 350ºF, the liquid water can’t exceed 212ºF/100ºC,  the temperature at which it boils and turns from liquid into vapor. Less well  known is the fact that the water temperature can vary over a range of 40ºF  depending on the pan containing the water and whether it’s covered. A pan  of water is heated by the oven, but it’s simultaneously cooled as water  molecules evaporate from the surface. The actual water temperature is  determined by the balance between heating of the water mass through the  pan, and evaporative cooling at the water surface. More heat accumulates in a  thick cast iron pan or passes through infrared-transparent glass than is  transmitted by thin stainless steel. So in a moderate oven, a cast-iron water  bath may reach 195ºF/87ºC, a glass bath 185ºF/ 83ºC, and a stainless one  180ºF/80ºC. If the pans are covered with foil, then evaporative cooling is
prevented, and all of them will come to a full boil.  Custards are tenderest when heated gently, and so are best cooked in an  open water bath — one, however, that is sure to reach at least 185ºF;  otherwise the mix may never completely set. Many cooks take the precaution  of folding a kitchen towel in the bottom of the water bath so that the custard  cups or dish won’t be in direct contact with the hot pan, but this can backfire:  the towel prevents the water from circulating under the cups, so the water  trapped there reaches the boil and rocks the cups around. A wire rack works  better.  Cream Theory and Practice  Creams are easier to make than custards in two respects. They’re heated on the  stovetop, so the cook doesn’t have to consider the fine points of heat transfer in  the oven. And because they’re not served as is, in the container they’re cooked in,  some curdling can be tolerated and remedied by putting the cream through a  strainer before it’s served.  Pourable and Stiff Creams   There are two broad classes of creams, and they  demand entirely different handling by the cook. The   pourable creams,   crème  anglaise for example, are meant to have the consistency of heavy cream at serving  temperature. They contain the standard eggs, milk, and sugar (sugar is omitted for  a savory cream), and are cooked only until they just begin to thicken, far below the  boil. The   cream fillings   — crème pâtissière, banana cream, and so on — are meant  to stay put in a dish and hold their shape. They are therefore stiffened with a  substantial dose of flour or cornstarch; and this means not only that they   can   be  heated to the boil, they   must   be boiled. Egg yolks contain a starch-digesting  enzyme, amylase, that is remarkably resistant to heat. Unless a starch-egg mix is  brought to a full boil, the yolk amylase will survive, digest the starch, and turn the  stiff cream into a pourable one.  When stored for any time, creams should be protected against the formation of the  leathery skin that results from evaporation, which concentrates and toughens the  surface layer of protein and starch. Butter can be dotted onto the warm surface,
where the milk fat will melt and spread into a protective layer; and sprinkled sugar  will form   a   layer   of   concentrated   syrup   that   resists   evaporation. The   most  straightforward solution is to press waxed paper or buttered parchment directly  onto the cream. Avoid plastic wrap; its plasticizing chemicals tend to migrate into  fat-rich foods.  A Medieval Cheesecake  Tart de bry  Take raw yolks of eggs, and good fat cheese, and dress it, and mix it well  together; and add powder of ginger, and of cinnamon, and sugar, and saffron,  and put it in a crust, and bake it, and serve it forth.  — from a manuscript published in   Antiquitates Culinariae,   1791 (ca. 1400)  Crème Anglaise and Other Pourable Creams   The mix for a stirred cream is made  much as baked-custard mixes are. An especially rich cream may call for yolks only,  as many as 4 or 5 per cup/250 ml milk. The eggs and sugar are mixed with scalded  milk or cream, and the mixture is then stirred constantly on the stovetop until it  thickens enough to cling to the spoon, at around 180ºF/80ºC. The gentle heat of a  double boiler minimizes the possibility of curdling, but it takes longer than direct  heat. The thickened cream is then strained of any coagulated egg or other solid  particles, and cooled, with occasional stirring to prevent the proteins from setting  into a solid gel. An ice bath will cool the cream quickly, but demands more  frequent stirring to maintain an even texture. Fruit purees are generally added  after the cooling, because their acidity and fibrous particles can cause curdling  during the cooking.  Pastry Cream,   Bouillie,   and Cream-Pie   Fillings   Along with crème anglaise, pastry  cream is one of the most versatile of the dessert maker’s stock preparations. It’s  used mainly to fill and decorate cakes and pastries, and is a common reinforcing  base for sweet soufflés; in Italy and France it’s even cut into pieces and fried on its  own. It must therefore be thick enough to hold its shape at room temperature, and  so is stiffened with between 1 and 2 tablespoons flour (or about half that amount  of pure starch) per cup liquid/10–20 gm per 250 ml.
Pastry cream is made by adding scalded milk to the mixture of sugar, eggs, and  flour, whose protective action allows the mix to be brought to a full boil over direct  heat without curdling. After a minute or so of boiling (and constant stirring) to  thoroughly inactivate the yolk amylase enzyme and to extract starch from its  granules, and to improve the flavor, the thickened cream is scraped into a bowl  and allowed to cool with minimal stirring (stirring breaks the developing starch  network and thins it out). Once cool, pastry cream is sometimes enriched with  cream or butter, or lightened with foamed egg whites, or simultaneously enriched  and lightened with whipped cream.  A traditional French variant on pastry cream is the   bouillie   (literally “boiled”; the  word means a plain porridge-like cereal paste), which is made at the last minute,  and primarily to reinforce soufflés. For a   bouillie,   milk, sugar, and flour are heated  together to the boil, removed from the heat, and the eggs beaten in as the mix  cools. Because the egg proteins are not as thoroughly heated and coagulated as  they are in the technique for pastry cream, the consistency of a   bouillie   is lighter  and smoother. Some yolk amylase enzyme survives in a   bouillie,   but this doesn’t  matter if the dish is to be made and served immediately; the enzyme takes hours  to digest a noticeable amount of starch.  However, the survival of yolk amylase can spell disaster in the fillings for American  cream pies, which are often made in the fashion of a   bouillie   rather than a pastry  cream, and are held for hours or days before serving, enough time for a perfect  cream pie to disintegrate into a soupy mess. No matter what a recipe may say,  always be sure that the egg yolks in a starch-thickened pie filling are heated all the  way to the boil.  The First Recipe for Pastry Cream  Pastry cream has been a standard professional preparation for more than  three centuries.  The Manner of Making Cresme de Pâstissier  Take for example a   chopine   [3 cups/750 ml] of good milk…. Put the  milk in a pot on the fire: you must also have four eggs, and while the  milk heats up, break two eggs, and mix the white and yolk with about a
half   litron   [7 oz/185 gm] flour, as if for making porridge, and a little  milk. And when the flour is well diluted so that it has no more lumps,  you throw in the other two eggs to mix them well with this preparation.  And when the milk begins to boil you pour in little by little this mix of  eggs and flour and milk, and boil together on a low flame that is clear  and without smoke; stir with a spoon as you would a porridge. You  must also add salt at your discretion as it cooks, and a quarteron [a  quarter-pound/125 gm] good fresh butter.  This cream should be cooked for 20 to 25 minutes, then pour it into a  bowl and set aside this preparation, which pastry cooks call cream and  use in many baked goods.  —   Le Pâtis sier françois,   ca. 1690  Fruit Curds   Fruit curds — lemon curd is the most common — can be thought of as  a kind of cream in which the place of milk is taken by fruit juice, usually enriched  with butter. (They may have begun as a sweetened version of creamy eggs  scrambled with fruit juice; see p. 86.) Fruit curds are meant to have a spoonable  consistency that works well as a filling for small pastries or a breakfast spread, and  must be sweet enough to balance the acidity of the juice. They therefore contain  no flour, more sugar, and more eggs than do milk creams, typically 4 eggs (or 8  yolks) and a cup or more of sugar for a half-cup of butter and a half-cup of juice  (375 gm sugar per 125 ml each of butter and juice).  Egg Foams: Cooking with the Wrist  If the transformation of eggs by heat seems remarkable, consider what beating can  do! Physical agitation normally breaks down and destroys structure. But beat eggs  and you   create   structure. Begin with a single dense, sticky egg white, work it with a  whisk, and in a few minutes you have a cupful of snowy white foam, a cohesive  structure that clings to the bowl when you turn it upside down, and holds its own  when mixed and cooked. Thanks to egg whites we’re able to harvest the air, and  make it an integral part of meringues and mousses, gin fizzes and soufflés and  sabayons.
The full foaming power of egg white seems to have burst forth in the early 17th  century. Cooks had noticed the egg’s readiness to foam long before then, and by  Renaissance times were exploiting it in two fanciful dishes: imitation snow and the  confectioner’s miniature loaves and biscuits. But in those days the fork was still a  novelty, and twigs, shreds of dried fruits, and sponges could deliver only a coarse  froth at best (see box, p. 101). Sometime around 1650, cooks began to use more  efficient whisks of bundled straw, and meringues and soufflés start to appear in  cookbooks.  Like the head on a beer or a cappuccino, an egg foam is a liquid — the white —  filled with a gas — air — in such a way that the mixture of liquid and gas keeps its  shape, like a solid. It’s a mass of bubbles, with air inside each bubble, and the white  spread out into a thin film to form the bubble walls. And the makeup of those  liquid walls determines how long a foam can stand up. Pure water has such a  strong surface tension — such strong attractive forces among its molecules — that  it immediately starts to pull itself together into a compact puddle; and it’s so runny  that it puddles almost immediately. The many nonwater molecules in egg white  both reduce the surface tension of the water they float in, and make it less runny,  and thus allow the bubbles to survive long enough to accumulate into a sizeable  mass. What gives the mass of foam a useful kitchen lifetime is the white’s team of  proteins.  How the Egg Proteins Stabilize Foams  Stress Builds Protein Solidarity   As is true for the setting of heated eggs and  custards, the key to the stable egg foam is the tendency of the proteins to unfold  and bond to each other when they’re subjected to physical stress. In a foam this  creates a kind of reinforcement for the bubble walls, the culinary equivalent of  quick-setting cement. Whipping exerts two kinds of physical stress on the proteins.  First, as we force the whisk through the white, the whisk wires drag some of the  liquid with them, and create a pulling force that unfolds the compacted protein  molecules.   And   second,   because   water   and   air   are   very   different   physical  environments, the simple mixing of air into the whites creates an imbalance of  forces that also tugs the proteins out of their usual folded shape. All these  unfolded proteins (mainly the globulins and ovotransferrin) tend to gather where  air and water meet, with their water-loving portions immersed in the liquid and  their   water-avoiding   portions   projecting   into   the   air.   Thus   disturbed   and
concentrated, they readily form bonds with each other. So a continuous, solid  network of proteins pervades the bubble walls, holding both water and air in  place.  Foamed egg whites. The folded proteins in egg white (left) produce a light, long-lived  foam by unfolding at the interface between liquid and air, the walls of the air bubbles.  The unfolded proteins then bond to each other, and form a solid meshwork of  reinforcement around the bubbles (right).  Permanent Reinforcement   A raw egg-white foam will eventually coarsen, settle,  and separate. It must therefore be reinforced when it is turned into a final dish. This  may be done by adding other thickening ingredients — such things as flour,  cornstarch, chocolate, or gelatin. But if the foam is to be used relatively pure, as in a  meringue or a flourless soufflé, the egg proteins have to do the job themselves.  With the help of heat, they do beautifully.  Ovalbumin, the major protein in egg white, is relatively immune to beating and  doesn’t contribute much to the raw foam. But it is sensitive to heat, which causes it  to unfold and coagulate. So when the raw foam is cooked, ovalbumin more than  doubles the amount of solid protein reinforcement in the bubble walls. At the  same time, much of the free water in the foam evaporates. Heat thus allows the  cook to transform a transient semi-liquid foam into a permanent solid one.
Early Egg-White Foams: “Snow” and Biscuits  How to Break Whites of Eggs Speedily  A fig or two shred in pieces and then beaten amongst the whites of  eggs will bring them into an oil speedily: some break them with a  stubbed rod, and some by wringing them often through a sponge.  — Sir Hugh Platt,   Delightes for Ladies,   1605  Eggs in Snow  Break the eggs, separate the whites from the yolks, place the eggs on a  plate with some butter, season them with salt, place on hot coals. Beat  and whip the whites well, and just before serving throw them on the  yolks with a drop of rosewater, the fire iron underneath: sugar, then  serve.  Another way: You may put the yolks in the middle of the snow that is  made with your whipped whites, and then cook them before the fire on  a plate.  — François Pierre de La Varenne,   Le Cuisinier françois,   1651  To Make Italian Biskets  Take a quarter of a pound of searsed [sieved] Sugar, and beat it in an  Alabaster Mortar with the white of an Egg, and a little Gum Dragon  [gum tragacanth] steept in Rose water to bring it to a perfect Paste,  then mould it up with a little Anniseed and a grain of Musk; then make  it up like Dutch bread, and bake it on a Pye-plate in a warm Oven, till  they rise somewhat high and white, take them out, but handle them  not till they be throughly dry and cold.  —   Queen’s Closet Open’d,   1655  How Proteins   Destabilize   Foams  The very same forces that make egg foams also break egg foams. Often just as the  foam is reaching its optimum texture, it will get grainy, lose volume, and separate
into a dry froth and a runny liquid. As the proteins bond to each other to support  the foam, they embrace each other too tightly, and squeeze out the water they  had held between them. There are several different kinds of bonds by which the  long, unfolding egg proteins are joined to each other in a reinforcing network:  bonds between positively and negatively charged parts of molecules, between  water-like parts, between fat-like parts, and between sulfur groups. The protein  network begins to collapse when too many of these bonds accumulate and the  proteins cluster together too tightly. Fortunately, there are simple ways for the  cook to limit the accumulation of bonds and prevent the collapse of albumen  foams.  Blocking Sulfur Bonds with Copper Bowls…   Long before anyone knew about  egg proteins or their chemical bonds, cooks had come up with a way of controlling  them. The French tradition has long specified the use of copper utensils for making  egg foams. One early trace of this tradition is a 1771 illustration in the French  Encyclopédie   that shows a boy in a pastry kitchen working with a straw whisk and  what the accompanying key identifies as “a copper bowl for beating egg whites.” It  turns out that along with a very few other metals, copper has the useful tendency  to form extremely tight bonds with reactive sulfur groups: so tight that the sulfur is  essentially prevented from reacting with anything else. So the presence of copper  in foaming egg whites essentially eliminates the strongest kind of protein bond  that can form, and makes it harder for the proteins to embrace each other too  tightly. Sure enough, if you whip egg whites in a copper bowl — or in a glass bowl  to which you’ve added a pinch of a powdered copper supplement from a health  food store — the foam stays glossy and never develops grains. A silver-plated bowl  will do the same thing.  …And   Acids   There   are   disadvantages   to   the   traditional   copper   bowl:   it’s  expensive, and a nuisance to keep clean. (Copper contamination is negligible; a  cup of foam contains a tenth of our normal daily intake.) Fortunately there’s a  nonmetallic alternative for controlling reactive sulfur groups. The sulfur bonds  form when the sulfur-hydrogen (S-H) groups on two different protein molecules  shed their hydrogens and form a sulfur-sulfur (S-S) connection with each other. The  addition of an acid boosts the number of free-floating hydrogen (H) ions in the egg  white, which makes it much harder for the S-H groups to shed their own H, and so  slows the sulfur bonding down to a crawl. A good dose is   teaspoon/0.5g cream ⅛  of tartar or ½ teaspoon/2ml lemon juice per egg white, added at the beginning of
the beating.  Copper bowls and eggs in the 18th century. This is a detail of “Pâtissier,” or “The Pastry-  cook,” from the Encyclopédie , an engraving first published in 1771. The boy at right  wields what the accompanying key calls “a copper bowl for beating egg whites and  mixing them with the dough from which biscuits are made.”  A Silver Bullet for the Copper Theory  Why do copper bowls make more stable egg foams? I’ve wondered about this  for many years. In 1984 I did some experiments with the help of Stanford  University biologists, and then published a theory in the British science  journal   Nature   and in the first edition of this book. The experiments suggested  that one of the albumen proteins, ovotransferrin, takes up copper from the  bowl surface and is thereby rendered resistant to unfolding — which could  make the foam as a whole resistant to overcoagulating. That theory stood up  for ten years, until one day on a whim I tried whipping egg whites in a silver-  plated bowl. Ovotransferrin doesn’t bind silver, so the foam should have  turned grainy. It didn’t. It remained light and glossy. I resumed my frothy  investigations, and learned that both copper and silver do block sulfur  reactions between proteins. Hence the revised edition of the copper theory  outlined here.
The Enemies of Egg Foams  There are three enemies to the successful mounting of a foam which the cook  should be careful to exclude from the bowl: egg yolk, oil or fat, and detergent. All  are chemical relatives, and interfere with foaming in the same ways: by competing  with the proteins for a place at the air-water interface without offering any  structural reinforcement; and by interfering with the bonding of the protein  molecules. Traces of these troublemakers won’t absolutely prevent you from  making a foam, but they’ll make you work harder and longer, and the foam won’t  be as light or stable. Of course yolk and fat can safely be mixed with a finished  foam, as happens in many recipes for soufflés and egg-leavened batters.  The Effects of Other Ingredients  Egg white foams are almost always made with other ingredients, and these can  influence the beating process and the final consistency.  Salt   Salt increases the whipping time and decreases the foam’s stability. Salt  crystals dissolve into positively charged sodium and negatively charged chloride  ions, and these probably compete for bonding sites on the unfolded protein  molecules,   thereby   reducing   the   number   of   protein-protein   bonds   and   so  weakening the overall structure. It’s therefore best to add salt to the other  components of a dish — the base of a soufflé, for example — rather than to the  foam itself.  Sugar   Sugar both hinders and helps foam making. Added early in the process, it  delays foaming, and it reduces the foam’s ultimate volume and lightness. The delay  comes from sugar’s interference with the unfolding and bonding of the proteins.  And the reduction in volume and lightness is caused by the syrupy sugar-egg  mixture being harder to spread into thin bubble walls. Slow foaming is a real  disadvantage when the whites are whipped by hand — at standard soft-meringue  levels, it doubles the work — but less so if you’re using a stand mixer.  The helpful thing about sugar is that it improves the foam’s stability. By making the  liquid thick and cohesive, sugar greatly slows drainage from the bubble walls and  coarsening of texture. In the oven, the dissolved sugar hangs onto the water  molecules and so delays their evaporation in the high heat until after ovalbumin  has   had   time   to   coagulate   and   reinforce   the   raw   foam.   And   it   eventually
contributes reinforcement of its own in the form of fine but solid, cotton-candy-  like strands of dry sugar.  Sugar is usually incorporated into the egg whites after the foam has begun to  form, when many proteins are already unfolded. For some purposes, cooks will mix  sugar and whites at the outset, in order to obtain a very firm, dense foam.  Water   Water is seldom called for, but in small amounts it increases the volume and  lightness of the foam. Because water thins the whites, however, it’s more likely that  some liquid will drain from the foam. Albumen diluted by 40% or more of its  volume in water cannot produce a stable foam.  Basic Egg-Beating Techniques  Beating egg whites into a foam is one of those techniques about which cooks and  cookbooks wax stern and stringent. In fact it’s not all that sensitive to details. Just  about any egg and bowl and whisk can give you a good foam.  Choosing the Eggs   An egg foam begins with the eggs. Old eggs at room  temperature are often recommended on the grounds that the whites are thinner  and therefore foam more rapidly. This is true, and   very   fresh eggs are said to be  almost impossible to foam by hand. But fresh eggs are less alkaline and so make a  more stable foam; the older thin white also drains from the foam more easily, and  old eggs are more likely to leave traces of yolk in the white. Cold yolks are less  likely to break as you separate them from the whites, and the whipping process  quickly warms cold eggs anyway. Fresh eggs right out of the refrigerator will work  fine, especially if you’re using an electric mixer. Egg foams can also be made with  dried egg whites. Powdered egg whites are pure, pasteurized, freeze-dried egg  whites. “Meringue powder” contains more sugar than egg, and includes gums to  stabilize the foam.  Bowl and Whisk   The bowl in which you beat the whites should be large enough to  accommodate an eightfold expansion of their volume. It’s often recommended  that the cook avoid making egg foams in plastic bowls, because plastics are  hydrocarbon relatives of fats, and tend to retain traces of fats and soaps. While this  is true, the bowl is also unlikely to release such traces into a mass of egg white.  Ordinary cleaning is adequate to make a plastic bowl suitable for foaming eggs.  If you’re beating by hand, a large “balloon whisk” aerates a greater volume of the
egg whites at a time and will speed your work. If you have a choice of machines, a  stand mixer whose beater both spins on its shaft and traces a curlicue path from  the center to the edge of the bowl (a “hypocycloidal” or planetary motion) beats  the whites more evenly and leaves less unfoamed. Less efficient beaters produce a  denser texture.  Interpreting the Foam’s Appearance   There are various ways to judge when the  foam is at its optimum, from seeing whether the foam will support the weight of a  coin or an egg, to seeing how it supports itself, in soft mounds or sharply defined  peaks, to seeing whether it clings to the bowl or slips along its surface, whether its  surface looks glossy or dry. All these tests tell us how crowded the air bubbles are,  and how much lubrication they have between them in the way of liquid from the  egg white. And different dishes will define an optimum foam differently. The  lightening power of an egg foam depends not just on the foam’s volume, but also  on how easily it can be mixed with other ingredients, and how well it can  accommodate bubble expansion in the oven. Soufflés and cakes require the  lubrication and expansion tolerance of a somewhat underbeaten foam, while in  meringues and related pastries volume is less important than shape-holding  stiffness.  Glossy Soft Peaks and Stiff Peaks   At the “soft peak” stage, when glossy foam  edges retain some shape but droop, and when the foam doesn’t yet cling to the  bowl, the somewhat coarse bubbles are still lubricated by plenty of liquid, which  would quickly drain to the bottom of the bowl. At the “stiff peak” stage, where the  foam is still glossy but now retains a well-defined edge and clings to the bowl, the  foam is approaching 90% air, and the egg liquid has been spread so thin that the  protein webs in adjacent bubble walls begin to catch on each other and on the  bowl surface. There’s just enough lubrication left for the foam to be creamy and  easily mixed with other ingredients. This stage, or perhaps just before it, is the  optimum for making mousses, soufflés, sponge cakes, and similar dishes that  involve mixing and further rising in the oven. Further beating gains little additional  volume.  Dry Peaks and Beyond   Just past the stiff-peak stage, the foam is even firmer,  takes on a dull, dry appearance and crumbly consistency, and begins to leak some  liquid, so that it slips away from the bowl again. At this “slip-and-streak” stage, as  pastry chef Bruce Healy describes it, the protein webs in adjacent bubble walls are  bonding to each other and squeezing out what little liquid once separated them.
Pastry makers look for this stage to give them the firmest foam for a meringue or  cookie   batter;   they   stop   the   incipient   overcoagulation   and   weeping   by  immediately adding sugar, which separates the proteins and absorbs the water.  They also start the beating with about half the cream of tartar per egg that a cake  or soufflé maker will, so that the foam will in fact progress to this somewhat  overwhipped condition. Past the slip-and-streak stage, the foam begins to lose  volume and get grainy.  Egg foams can be used on their own or as the aerating ingredient in a variety of  complicated mixtures.  Meringues: Sweet Foams on Their Own  Though they’re sometimes folded into cake or cookie batters or fillings, meringues  — sweetened egg foams — generally stand by themselves as a discrete element in  a dish: as a frothy topping, for example, or a creamy icing, or a hard edible  container, or melt-in-the-mouth decoration. A meringue foam must therefore be  stiff and stable enough to hold its shape. The cook obtains both stiffness and  stability by the addition of sugar and/or of heat. Meringues are often baked very  slowly in a low oven (200ºF/93ºC) to dry them out into a brittle, pristinely white  morsel or container. (The door of electric ovens should be left slightly ajar to allow  the meringue’s moisture to escape; gas ovens are already vented.) When quickly  browned in a hot oven or under the broiler — atop a pie, for example — the  surface gets crisp while the interior remains moist. Poached in milk for the dish  called Floating Islands, they are firm yet moist throughout.  Sugar in Meringues   The addition of sugar is what makes a fragile egg-white foam  into a stable, glossy meringue. The more sugar added, the more body the  meringue will have, and the crisper it will be when baked. The proportion (by  either volume or weight) of sugar to egg white ranges from about 1 to 1 to about 2  to 1, the equivalent of a 50% and a 67% sugar solution, respectively. The higher is  typical of jams and jellies — and also the room-temperature limit of sugar’s  solubility in water. Ordinary granulated sugar won’t dissolve completely in a “hard”  meringue, and will leave a gritty texture and weeping syrup drops. Superfine and  powdered   “confectioner’s”   sugar,   or   a   premade   syrup,   are   better   choices.  (Powdered sugar, which weighs half as much as the other sugars cup for cup,  contains 10% cornstarch to help prevent caking, which some cooks dislike and
others value as moisture-absorbing insurance.)  Food Words:   Meringue  Thanks to the   Larousse Gastronomique,   it’s widely believed that the meringue  was invented by a pastry chef in the Swiss town of Mieringen around 1720,  and brought to France a couple of decades later by the Polish father-in-law of  Louis XV. Sounds suitably colorful: except that the French writer Massialot had  already published a recipe for “Meringues” in 1691.  The linguist Otto Jänicke has traced the word   meringue   back to an alteration  of the Latin word   merenda,   meaning “light evening meal,” into   meringa,   a form  that was found in the Artois and Picardie near what is now Belgium. Jänicke  cites many variations on   merenda   that variously meant “evening bread,”  “shepherd’s loaf,”   “food taken to the field and forest,”   “traveler’s snack.”  What do breads and road food have to do with whipped egg whites? Early  baked sugar-egg pastes were called “biscuits,”   “breads,” and “loaves” because  they were miniature imitations of these baked goods (biscuits, being  thoroughly dried and therefore light and durable, were standard traveler’s  fare). Perhaps such a confection was called   meringa   in northeast France. Then,  when cooks from that region discovered the advantage of beating the eggs  thoroughly with the new straw whisk before adding sugar, the local term  spread with their invention, and in the rest of France served to distinguish this  delicate foam from its dense predecessors.  Meringue Types   The traditional meringue terminology — French, Italian, Swiss,  and so on — is unclear and used inconsistently. These foams are best classified  according to the method of preparation and resulting texture. Meringues can be  either   uncooked   or   cooked.   If the sugar is added after the egg whites have been  whipped on their own, the meringue will be relatively   light ; if the sugar is added  early in the whipping, the meringue will be relatively   dense.  Uncooked Meringues   Uncooked meringues are the simplest and most common,  and provide a broad range of textures, from frothy to creamy to dense and stiff.  The lightest possible consistency is obtained by first beating the whites to a firm
foam and then gently folding in the sugar with a spatula. The sugar dissolves into  the existing bubble walls and adds both bulk and cohesiveness to them. The  added bulk gives the bubbles more room to slide past each other and creates a  soft, frothy consistency suitable for a spread pie topping or for folding into a  mousse or chiffon mix, but too fragile to shape. A creamier, firmer consistency  results when the sugar is not merely folded in, but beaten in. In this case, the  sugar’s added bulk is spread out as the beating further subdivides the bubbles,  and the cohesiveness of the sugar-water mixture noticeably tightens the foam’s  texture. The longer you beat the egg-sugar mixture, the stiffer it will get and the  more finely it can be shaped.  These standard methods take only a few minutes but require the cook’s attention.  Some professionals, particularly in France, make firm meringues suitable for the  pastry pipe on the kitchen equivalent of autopilot. They place all the sugar in the  bowl of a stand mixer, add a portion of the egg whites with some lemon juice to  prevent graining, mix for several minutes — the timing is not critical — then add  more whites, mix a while, and so on. The result is a fine-textured, stiff, supple  meringue. Beating the eggs gradually into the sugar rather than the other way  around does slow the foaming, but requires little supervision. Such “automatic”  meringues are denser than usual and less brittle when dried down.  Between the two extremes — adding all the sugar after the foam has been made,  or adding it all at the start of foaming — are a host of methods that call for adding  certain portions of the sugar along the way. There’s plenty of latitude in meringue  making! Just remember: the earlier the sugar is added in the course of beating, the  firmer and finer-textured the meringue. Sugar folded in after the beating stops will  soften the texture.  Cooked Meringues   Cooked meringues are more trouble to make than uncooked  meringues, and are generally denser because heat sets the albumen proteins and  prematurely limits the trapping of air. However, they offer several advantages.  Because sugar is more soluble in hot liquid than in cold, they more readily absorb a  large proportion of sugar. Like the dense automatic meringue (above), they’re less  brittle when dried down. Partial coagulation of the egg proteins stabilizes these  foams enough to sit without separating for a day or more. And for cooks  concerned about the safety of raw eggs, some cooked meringues get hot enough  to kill salmonella bacteria.  There are two basic kinds of cooked meringues. The first (“Italian”) is the   syrup-
cooked meringue.   Sugar is boiled separately with some water to 240 or 250ºF/115–  120ºC (the “soft-ball” stage, around 90% sugar, at which fudge and fondant are  made), the whites whipped to stiff peaks, and the syrup then streamed and beaten  into the whites. The result is a fluffy yet fine-textured, stiff foam. It has enough  body to decorate pastries and to hold for a day or two before use, but is also light  enough to blend into batters and creams. Because much of the syrup’s heat is lost  to the bowl, whisk, and air, the foam mass normally gets no hotter than 130 or  135ºF/55–58ºC, which is insufficient to kill salmonella.  The second sort of cooked meringue (“Swiss”) is most clearly described as a   cooked  meringue   plain and simple (the French   meringue cuite ). To make it, eggs, acid, and  sugar are heated in a hot-water bath and beaten until a stiff foam forms. The bowl  is then removed from the heat and the foam beaten until it cools. This preparation  can pasteurize the egg whites. Thanks to the protective effects of sugar, cream of  tartar, and constant agitation, you can heat the meringue mixture to 170 or  175ºF/75–78ºC and still end up with a stable though dense foam. The cooked  meringue can be refrigerated for several days, and is usually piped into decorative  shapes.  Meringue Problems: Weeping, Grittiness, Stickiness   Meringues can go wrong in  a number of ways. Under- or overbeaten foams may weep syrup into unsightly  beads or puddles. Beads also form when the sugar hasn’t been completely  dissolved; residual crystals attract water from their surroundings and make pockets  of concentrated syrup. Undissolved sugar (including invisibly small particles  present in an undercooked syrup that then slowly grow at room temperature) will  give a gritty texture to a meringue. Too high an oven temperature can squeeze  water from the coagulating proteins faster than it can evaporate and produce  syrup beads; it can also cause the foam to rise and crack, and turn its surface an  unappealing yellow.  A common problem with meringue pie toppings is that they weep syrup onto the  base and don’t adhere properly. This can be caused both by relative undercooking  of the foam bottom when the pie base is cold and the oven hot, or by relative  overcooking on a hot pie base in a moderate oven. Preventive measures include  covering the pie base with a syrup-absorbing layer of crumbs before adding the  meringue topping, and including starch or gelatin in the foam to help it retain  moisture.  Humid weather is bad for meringues. Their sugary surface absorbs moisture from
the air and gets soft and sticky. It’s best to transfer dried meringues directly from  the oven to an airtight container, and serve as soon as possible after removing  from the container.  Royal Icing  A given weight of egg whites can’t dissolve more than about double that  weight in sugar. Yet royal icing, a traditional decorative material in pastry  work, is made by whipping a 4 to 1 mixture of powdered sugar and egg white  for 10 or 15 minutes. Royal icing is not a simple foam — it’s a combination of a  very dense foam and a paste. Much sugar remains undissolved, but it’s so fine  that we can’t feel it on the tongue.  Cold Mousses and Soufflés: Reinforcement from Fat and Gelatin   In addition to  being served as is in the form of a sugar- and heat-stabilized meringue, an egg  foam can also be enrobed in a mixture of other ingredients, for which the foam  serves as a hidden scaffolding. The cold mousse and cold soufflé (essentially a  mousse molded to look like a hot soufflé that has risen above its dish) hold well for  hours, even days, and require only minimal cooking. Instead of being stabilized  when heat   coagulates   egg proteins, these mixtures are stabilized when cold  congeals   fats and gelatin protein.  The classic dish of this kind is chocolate mousse. In its purest form, it is made by  melting chocolate — a blend of cocoa butter, starchy cocoa particles, and finely  ground sugar — at around 100ºF/38ºC, combining it with raw egg yolks, and  combining this mixture with 3 to 4 times its volume of stiffly beaten egg whites  (see p. 112). The watery foam walls are thus augmented with the thick, yolky  chocolate, and much of the egg moisture is absorbed by the cocoa solids and  sugar, which further thickens the bubble walls. While still warm, the mousse is  spooned into serving dishes, and these are then refrigerated for several hours. As  the mousse cools, the cocoa butter congeals, and the bubble walls become rigid  enough   to   maintain   the   foam   structure   indefinitely.   The   chocolate   thus  strengthens the egg foam, and the foam spreads the stodgy chocolate mass into a  gossamer structure that melts on the tongue.
Soufflés: A Breath of Hot Air  Soufflés — savory and sweet mixes lightened with an egg-white foam, then  dramatically inflated above their dish by oven heat — have the reputation for  being difficult preparations. Certainly they can be among the most delicate, as  their name — French for “puffed,” “breathed,” “whispered” — suggests. In fact,  soufflés are reliable and resilient. Many soufflé mixes can be prepared hours, even  days in advance, and refrigerated or frozen until needed. If you manage to get   any  air into the mix, an inexorable law of nature will raise it in the oven, and opening  the door for a few seconds won’t do it any harm. The inevitable post-oven deflation  can be minimized by your choice of ingredients and cooking method, and can  even be reversed.  Edible Insulation  Egg foams are often used to cover and conceal the heart of a dish. Among the  most entertaining of these constructions is the hot, browned meringue  enclosing a mass of chilly ice cream: the baked Alaska, which derives from the  French   omelette surprise.   This thermal contrast is made possible by the  excellent insulating properties of cellular structures like foams. For the same  reason, a cup of cappuccino cools more slowly than a cup of regular coffee.  The basic idea of the soufflé — and of egg-leavened cakes as well — dates back at  least to the 17th century, when confectioners noticed that a “biscuit” paste of egg  whites and sugar worked in a mortar would rise in the oven like a loaf of bread.  Sometime around 1700, French cooks began to incorporate foamed whites into  the yolks to make a puffy   omelette soufflée.   At mid-century, Vincent La Chapelle  could offer five   omelettes soufflées   and — under the names   timbale   and   tourte   —  the first recorded soufflés as we now know them, their foams reinforced with  pastry cream, which came to displace the   omelette soufflée   in restaurants. The great  19th century chef Antonin Carême called the reinforced soufflé “the queen of hot  pastries,” but also saw its success as the triumph of convenience and stability over  the   omelette soufflée ’s incomparable delicacy of texture and flavor. Carême wrote,  “The   omelette soufflée   must be free of the concoction that goes into the soufflé,
whether it be rice flour or starch. The gourmet must have the patience to wait if he  wishes to eat the   omelette soufflée   in all its perfection.”  Early Recipes for the Omelette Soufflée and Soufflé  This 18th century recipe for the omelette soufflée is an interesting mix of  savory and sweet ingredients, while the timbales are soufflés reinforced with  pastry cream.  Omelette Soufflée   with Veal Kidney  Take a roasted veal kidney, chop with its fat; put in a casserole and cook  for a moment to break apart. Then off the fire add a large spoonful of  sweet cream and a dozen egg yolks, whose whites you will whip;  season the mixture with salt, minced parsley, minced candied lemon  peel. Whip your egg whites into snow, mix with the rest, and beat well.  Then put a piece of butter in a pan, and when it has melted pour in your  mixture, and cook gently. Hold a red-hot fire iron above it. Then invert it  onto the serving platter and put it on a small stove, so that it will rise  up; when risen to a handsome enough height, powder with sugar and  glaze with the fire iron without touching the omelette. Serve hot as an  entremet.  Timbales of Cream  You will have a good pastry cream, bitter-almond biscuits, candied  lemon peel, orange flower; add to these egg whites whipped into snow.  You will have little timbale dishes greased with good fresh butter: you  powder them with bread crumbs; then you fill them with your cream,  and cook them in the oven. When they are done, turn them out and  serve as a small hot entremet.  — Vincent La Chapelle,   Le Cuisinier moderne,   1742  Convenience is certainly one reason for the soufflé’s popularity among cooks. It  can be largely prepared in advance, even precooked and reheated. Versatility is  another. Soufflés can be made from practically every sort of food — pureed fruits
and vegetables and fish; cheese, chocolate, liqueurs — and in a broad range of  textures, from the puddinglike to the meltingly fragile   soufflé à la minute,   which is  Carême’s starch-free   omelette soufflée   barely altered.  The Soufflé Principle, Up Side: It   Must   Rise   The physical law that animates the  soufflé was discovered a few decades after its invention by — appropriately — a  French scientist and balloonist, J. A. C. Charles. Charles’s law is this: all else equal,  the volume occupied by a given weight of gas is proportional to its temperature.  Heat an inflated balloon and the air will take up more space, so the balloon  expands. Similarly, put a soufflé in the oven and its air bubbles heat up and swell,  so the mix expands in the only direction it can: out the top of the dish.  Charles’s law is part of the story, but not the whole story — it accounts for about a  quarter of the typical soufflé rise. The rest comes from the continuous evaporation  of water from the bubble walls into the bubbles. As portions of the soufflé  approach the boiling point, more liquid water becomes water vapor and adds to  the   quantity   of gas molecules in the bubbles, which increases the pressure on the  bubble walls, which causes the walls to stretch and the bubbles to expand.  Down Side: It Must Fall   Charles’s law also means that what must go up in the  oven must come down at the table. A balloon expands as its temperature rises, but  shrinks again if its temperature falls. Of course a soufflé must be taken out of the  oven to be served, and from that moment on it loses heat. As the soufflé bubbles  cool, the air they contain contracts in volume, and the vapor that came from liquid  water in the mix condenses back into liquid.  Rules of Thumb   Several basic facts follow from the nature of the driving forces  behind the soufflé. First, the higher the cooking temperature, the higher a soufflé  will rise: the plain heat expansion will be greater, and more mix moisture will be  vaporized. At the same time, a higher cooking temperature also means a greater  subsequent overpressure and swifter fall. Then there’s the effect of consistency. A  thick soufflé mix can’t rise as easily as a thin mix, but it also won’t fall as easily. A  stiff foam can resist the overpressure.  So the two critical factors that determine the behavior of a soufflé are the cooking  temperature and the consistency of the soufflé base. A hot oven and thin mix  create a more dramatic rise than a moderate oven (or water bath) and a thick mix,  but also a more dramatic collapse at the table.  Finally, a fact that follows from both the up and the down sides of the soufflé
principle: a fallen soufflé will rise again if put back into the oven. Those air bubbles  are still in there, as is most of the moisture; and both air and moisture will expand  again as the temperature goes up. You won’t get as high a rise the second or third  time around, because the soufflé mix has stiffened and there’s less water available.  But you can resurrect leftovers, or cook the soufflé once to set it and unmold it,  then again to serve it.  The rise and fall of a soufflé. Left: The soufflé mix begins filled with small air bubbles.  Center: Heat causes gases to expand and water to vaporize into steam, so the bubbles  expand and raise the mix. Right: After the soufflé has been cooked, cooling causes the  bubble gases to contract and the steam to condense into liquid water, so that the  bubbles contract and the soufflé shrinks.  The Soufflé Base   The soufflé base, the preparation into which the foamed egg  whites are incorporated, serves two essential purposes. The first is to provide the  soufflé’s flavor (the base must be   over   flavored to compensate for its dilution by  tasteless egg white and air). The second purpose is to contribute a reservoir of  moisture for the soufflé’s rise, and starch and protein to make the bubble walls  viscous enough that they won’t ooze down again. Usually the base is precooked  and can’t actually thicken during the soufflé’s rise. The bubble walls are set by the  egg white proteins, which can be effective only if they’re not excessively diluted by  the base material. The usual rule is to allow at least one white or one cup whipped  white per half-cup/125 ml base.  The consistency of the base has a strong influence on soufflé quality. Too liquid,  and the soufflé will rise and spill over before the egg proteins have a chance to set.  Too stiff, and it won’t mix evenly with the foamed whites or rise much. A common  rule of thumb is that the base should be cohesive yet soft enough to fall of its own
weight from a spoon.  Many Formulas   Soufflé bases are made from a broad range of ingredients. Those  that contain just egg yolks, sugar, and flavoring are the lightest and most delicate  and produce the equivalent of the   omelette soufflée , often called   soufflé à la minute  because it can be made quickly with no advance preparation. A concentrated  sugar syrup will make the bubble walls more viscous and stable, as will the various  carbohydrates (cellulose, pectin, starch) in pureed fruits and vegetables, and the  proteins in a puree of cooked meat, fish, or poultry. If the pureed flesh is raw, then  its proteins will coagulate during the cooking along with the egg whites and  provide substantial reinforcement to the foam. The starchy brown particles in  cocoa and chocolate stiffen the bubble walls by both absorbing moisture and  getting sticky and swollen as they do so.  The most versatile kind of soufflé base is thickened with cooked starch in the form  of stock preparations like pastry cream or béchamel sauce, or a   panade   (like pastry  cream, but without sugar and including butter) or   bouillie   (p. 99). The standard  consistency of a starchy base is that of a medium-thick sauce, and produces a  moist, fairly light soufflé. Double the flour and you get a drier, denser soufflé that is  robust enough to be unmolded, placed in a dish with a hot sauce, and raised again  in the oven or under the broiler (Escoffier’s   soufflé à la suissesse ). Triple the flour and  you get a so-called “pudding soufflé” — with the bready texture you would expect  from the name — that won’t fall no matter what you do to it. (Increase the flour 15-  fold and you have a sponge cake.)  Whipping and Folding the Egg Whites   The best consistency for egg whites in a  soufflé preparation is stiff yet moist, glossy peaks. A stiff but dry foam is harder to  mix evenly with the base, while a softer foam is still coarse — so the soufflé texture  will be the same — and may leave the mix so runny that it will overflow before it  sets.  The trick is to mix the two materials as evenly as possible while losing as little air as  possible. Typically, between a quarter and half of the foam volume is lost at this  stage. The traditional method of mixing base and foam is to vigorously stir a  quarter of the foam into the base to lighten it, then use a spatula to “fold” the two  together by repeatedly scooping some base, cutting vertically through the foam,  and depositing the base along the cut surface.  Why laboriously fold rather than quickly stir? Because the rough mass of starch,
fats, and other foreign matter in the base pops bubbles, and the more you rub the  bubbles   against   such   a   mass,   the   more   bubbles   you   lose.   Simply   stirring  continuously grates the two phases together and causes a substantial loss of air.  Folding has the advantage of disturbing the foam only along the surface where  the base is being deposited, and that surface is only disturbed for a single stroke.  The result is minimal grating of bubbles against mix, and maximal bubble survival.  Despite the usual cookbook direction to fold the whites and base together quickly,  it’s best to fold   slowly.   The disruptive shear force felt by a given bubble is  proportional to the velocity at which it’s being pushed along the base. The slower  your spatula moves, the less damage it will do to the foam.  The one exception to the folding rules is the soufflé made with a fruit puree or  juice cooked with sugar to a thick syrup. Such a base can be poured onto the foam  as it’s beaten — a soufflé version of the Italian meringue — and will actually  increase the mix volume.  Preparing and Filling the Soufflé Dish   Ever since La Chapelle’s timbale of cream,  soufflé dishes have been prepared in two steps: first the interior is buttered, and  then coated with sugar for a sweet soufflé, with breadcrumbs or grated cheese for  a savory one. The butter supposedly helps the soufflé mix slide up the side as it  expands, while the particles give the mix something to cling to as it climbs.  Contradictory claims, and not true! Soufflés made in unbuttered or uncrumbed  dishes rise just as high. The butter simply makes the soufflé surface easier to  detach from the dish, and sugar, breadcrumbs, and cheese make a nice crunchy,  brown crust for the otherwise soft interior.  Once put in its dish, a reasonably stiff soufflé mix can be held for several hours in  the refrigerator before the foam deteriorates. It will keep indefinitely in the freezer.  Cooking Soufflés   Baking soufflés is not a perilous enterprise. Put a room-  temperature soufflé mix in a hot oven and it will rise. Don’t worry about opening  the oven door. The mix can’t fall unless it actually begins to cool down, and even if  that did happen, it will rise again when it heats up again.  Most soufflés are placed directly on a rack or baking sheet in the oven, but small  individual soufflés are often light enough that they can be blasted halfway out of  their dish by the steam generated at the oven-hot dish bottom, so the dish ends  up half empty. A baking pan filled with water, or individual foil cups of water on a  baking sheet, will moderate the bottom temperature and keep a small soufflé in its
dish.  A   soufflé’s   appearance   and   consistency   are   strongly   affected   by   the   oven  temperature. At temperatures above 400ºF/200ºC, the mix rises the fastest, and the  surface can brown while the interior is still moist and creamy. At 325 to 350ºF/160  to 180ºC, the rising is more modest, and surface browning coincides with a firming  of the interior. A slow oven may coagulate the surfaces so gradually that the  expanding mix spills out of its dish rather than rising vertically. Doneness can be  determined by probing the interior with a toothpick, and is a matter of taste; some  people like a creamy interior that still clings to the toothpick, others prefer a more  fully cooked consistency, which clings to itself and leaves the toothpick clean.  Yolk Foams: Zabaglione and Sabayons  Yolks Can’t Foam Without Help   Beat an egg white for two minutes and it will  expand eightfold into a semisolid foam. Beat an egg yolk for ten minutes and you’ll  be lucky to double its volume. Yolks are richer in protein than whites, and have the  added advantage of emulsifying phospholipids that do a fine job of coating fat  droplets: so why can’t they stabilize air bubbles and make a decent foam?  One clue is what happens when you wash out your yolky bowl: the moment you  pour in some water, it foams! It turns out that the protein-rich, emulsifier-rich yolk  is deficient in water. Not only does it contain about half the water that the white  does, but nearly all of it is tightly bound to all the other materials. In one  tablespoon/15 ml of yolk, the volume typical of a large egg, there’s about a third of  a teaspoon/2 ml of free, foamable water. Add two teaspoons to give it the same  free water as a white, and it foams enthusiastically.  Enthusiastically but fleetingly. Put your ear to the foam and you’ll hear the bubbles  popping. The other deficiency of the egg yolk is that its proteins are too stable.  Neither the physical abuse of whipping nor the presence of air bubbles causes the  yolk proteins to unfold and bond with each other into a reinforcing matrix. Of  course heat will, as we know from hard-boiled yolks and custards. So supplement  the yolk with liquid, and the whipping with careful cooking, and the mixture will  rise to four or more times its original volume. Exactly this procedure is the principle  of zabaglione and sabayon sauces.  From Zabaglione to Sabayon   The recipe trail for yolk foams is spotty. Zabaglione  — from a root meaning “mixed,”   “confused” — was an Italian yolk-thickened spiced
wine in the 15th century, and by 1800 was sometimes foamy and sometimes not.  (Even some modern zabaglione recipes are not whipped but stirred, and come out  more like a winey crème anglaise.)  Medieval Precursors of Zabaglione and Sabayon  Our modern Italian and French versions of foamed egg yolks began in  medieval times as yolk-thickened wine, simply flavored in France and Italy,  highly spiced in England.  Chaudeau flament (“Flemish Hot Drink,” for the Sick)  Set a little water to boil; then beat egg yolks without the whites, mix  them with white wine and pour gradually into your water stirring it well  to keep it from setting; add salt when it is off the fire. Some people add  a very little verjuice.  — Taillevent,   Le Viandier,   ca. 1375  Cawdell Ferry  Take raw yolks of eggs separated from the whites; then take good wine,  and warm it in a pot on a fair fire, and throw in the yolks, and stir it well,  but let it not boil, till it be thick; and throw in sugar, saffron, and salt,  mace, gillyflowers and galingale [a relative of ginger] ground small,  and powdered cinnamon; and when you serve it, sprinkle with  powdered ginger, cinnamon, and nutmeg.  — Harleian MS 279, ca. 1425  Zabaglone  For four cups of Zabaglone get twelve fresh egg yolks, three ounces of  sugar, half an ounce of good cinnamon and a beaker of good sweet  wine. Cook this until it is as thick as a broth, then take it out and set it  on a plate in front of the boys. And if you like you can add a bit of fresh  butter.  —   Cuoco Napoletano,   ca. 1475, transl. Terence Scully
The French discovered zabaglione around 1800, and by 1850 had incorporated it  into their system of sauces as a dessert cream with the more refined-sounding  name   sabayon.   In the 20th century they extended the principle to savory cooking  broths and stocks, and to lighten classical yolk-based butter and oil sauces,  including hollandaise and mayonnaise. (For the sauces, see p. 639.)  Zabaglione Technique   The standard method for making zabaglione is to mix  equal volumes of sugar and yolks, add the wine — usually Marsala, and anywhere  from the same to four times the volume of yolks — set the bowl above a pan of  simmering water, and whip for several minutes until the mix becomes foamy and  thick. During the mixing and initial foaming, the elaborately nested spheres of yolk  proteins are unpacked for action. Dilution, the wine’s acidity and alcohol, and air  bubbles   all   disrupt   the   yolk   granules   and   lipoprotein   complexes   into   their  component molecules so that those molecules can coat the air bubbles and  stabilize them. When the temperature reaches 120ºF/50ºC, high enough to unfold  some of the yolk proteins, the mix thickens, traps air more efficiently, and begins to  expand. As the proteins continue to unfold and then bond to each other, the foam  rises into fluffy mounds. The key to a maximally light zabaglione is to stop the  heating just when the foam teeters on the cusp between liquid and solid. Further  cooking will produce a stiffer, denser, eventually tough sponge as the proteins  over-coagulate.  Zabaglione is traditionally made in a copper bowl over a water bath; the mix  thickens at such a low temperature that direct heat can quickly overcook it. In  professional kitchens, where experience is long and time is short, zabaglione and  sabayons are sometimes cooked right over a flame. The advantage of a copper  bowl in making yolk foams is not chemical, but physical: its excellent heat  conductivity makes it quickly responsive to the cook’s adjustments. However,  copper does impart a distinct metallic flavor to the foam, and some cooks prefer  stainless steel for this reason.  The ideal zabaglione or sweet sabayon is soft and meltingly evanescent, yet stable  enough that it can be refrigerated and served cold. Savory sabayons may be  cooked short of maximal fluffiness so that they remain easily pourable, but the  lubricating liquid in the bubble walls will eventually drain out and separate.  Fortunately, a separated sabayon can be rebeaten to its original consistency.
Pickled and Preserved Eggs  Until the recent developments in breeding and artificial lighting, domesticated  birds produced eggs seasonally: they would begin laying in the spring, continue  through the summer, and then cease in the fall. So, just as they did for milk and for  fruits and vegetables, our ancestors developed methods for preserving eggs so  that they could be eaten year-round. Many of these methods simply isolated the  eggs from the air and left them largely unchanged. Water saturated with lime, or  calcium hydroxide, is alkaline enough to discourage bacteria, and coats the egg  shell with a thin layer of calcium carbonate that partly seals the shell pores. Oiling  with linseed oil apparently began on Dutch farms around 1800. The early 20th  century brought the use of waterglass, or a solution of sodium silicate, which again  seals the shell pores and is bactericidal. These treatments were rendered obsolete  by the advent of refrigeration and year-round egg production.  Still vital 500 years after their first known description are Chinese preservation  methods that maintain the nutritional value of the egg but drastically change its  flavor, consistency, and appearance. The closest Western counterpart to this ovo-  alchemy is cheesemaking, which transforms milk into an entirely different food.  Ordinary vinegar-pickled eggs offer only a hint of the possibilities; they are to  Chinese preserved eggs as yogurt is to Stilton.  Pickled Eggs  Common pickled eggs are made by first boiling the eggs and then immersing  them in a solution of vinegar, salt, spices, and often a coloring like beet juice, for 1  to 3 weeks. Over that time the vinegar’s acetic acid dissolves much of the shell’s  calcium carbonate, penetrates the eggs, and lowers their pH sufficiently to prevent  the growth of spoilage microbes. (The vinegar in Easter-egg dyes etches the shell  surface and helps the dye penetrate.) Pickled eggs will keep for a year or more  without refrigeration.  Pickled eggs can be eaten shell — or its remains — and all. In addition to being  tart, they are firmer than freshly boiled eggs; the white is sometimes described as  rubbery. A more tender consistency can be obtained by including ample salt in the  pickling liquid and having the liquid at the boil when the eggs are immersed.  Though the eggs won’t spoil at room temperature, they will suffer less from
swollen yolks and split whites (which result when the egg absorbs the pickling  liquid too rapidly) if stored in the cold.  Chinese Preserved Eggs  Though the average Chinese consumes only a third as many eggs as the average  American, and though most of those eggs are chicken eggs, China is renowned for  its preserved duck eggs, including the “thousand-year-old” eggs. These and plain  salt-preserved eggs come from the duck-rich southern provinces, where they  made it possible to transport eggs to distant markets and store them for months  during the off season. The proteins and membranes of chicken eggs are less suited  to some of these treatments.  Salted Eggs   The simplest method for preserving eggs is to treat them with salt,  which draws the water out of bacteria and molds and inhibits their growth. The  eggs are immersed in a 35% salt solution, or coated individually with a paste of  salt, water, and clay or mud. After 20 or 30 days, the egg stops absorbing salt and  reaches chemical equilibrium. Strangely, the white remains liquid, but the yolk at  its center becomes solid. The high levels of positive sodium and negative chloride  ions actually shield the albumen proteins from each other, but cause the yolk  particles to agglomerate into a grainy mass. Salted eggs, which are variously called  hulidan   and   xiandan,   are boiled before they’re eaten.  Fermented Eggs   A second kind of preserved egg, little seen in the West, is made  by covering gently cracked eggs in a fermenting mass of cooked rice or other  grains mixed with salt: in essence a concentrated and salty version of sake or beer.  Zaodan   mature in four to six months and take on the aromatic, sweet, alcoholic  flavor of their surroundings. Both white and yolk coagulate and fall out of the  softened shell. Such eggs can be eaten as is or cooked first.  Pidan : “Thousand-Year-Old” Alkali-Cured Eggs   The most famous of preserved  eggs are the so-called “thousand-year-old” duck eggs, which actually have only  been made for about 500 years, take between one and six months to mature, and  keep for a year or so. They owe their popular name — the Chinese term is   pidan,   or  “coated eggs” — to their startlingly decrepit appearance: the shell encrusted with  mud, the white a transparent brown jelly, and the yolk a semisolid, somber jade.  The flavor too is earthy and elemental, eggy in the extreme, salty, stonily alkaline,  with strong accents of sulfur and ammonia.   Pidan   are toned down by rinsing the
shelled egg and allowing it time to “breathe” before serving. They are a delicacy in  China, and are usually served as an appetizer.  There are only two essential ingredients for making   pidan,   in addition to the eggs:  salt, and a strongly alkaline material, which can be wood ash, lime, sodium  carbonate, lye (sodium hydroxide), or some combination of these. Tea is often used  for flavor, and mud to create a paste that dries to a protective crust, though the  eggs can also be immersed in a water solution of the curing ingredients (this gives  a faster cure but also a coarser alkaline flavor). A mild, soft-yolked version of   pidan  is sometimes made by adding some lead oxide to the cure. The lead reacts with  sulfur from the egg white to form a fine black powder of lead sulfide, which blocks  the shell pores and slows the further movement of salt and alkaline ingredients  into the egg. (Lead is a potent nerve toxin, so such eggs should be avoided; look  for packages clearly labeled “no lead oxide.” A similar effect can be obtained by  replacing lead with zinc.)  Creating Clarity, Color, and Flavor   The real transforming agent in   pidan   is the  alkaline material, which gradually raises the already alkaline egg from a pH of  around 9 to 12 or more. This chemical stress causes what might be thought of as  an inorganic version of fermentation: that is, it denatures the egg proteins, and  breaks down some of the complex, flavorless proteins and fats into simpler, highly  flavorful components. The disruptively high pH forces the egg proteins to unfold,  and at the same time confers on them a strongly repelling negative charge. The  dissolved salt, with its positive and negative ions, moderates the repulsion enough  that the fine strands of widely dispersed albumen proteins are able to bond into a  solid yet transparent gel. In the yolk, the same extreme conditions destroy the  organized structure of the yolk spheres, and with it the usual graininess; the yolk  proteins coagulate into a creamy mass. The extreme alkalinity also browns the  albumen by accelerating the reaction between the proteins and the trace of  glucose (see p. 89), and it greens the yolk by encouraging the formation of ferrous  sulfide throughout the yolk, not just at its surface (as in hard-cooked eggs; see p.  89). Finally, the alkalinity intensifies the egg’s flavor by breaking down both  proteins and phospholipids into hydrogen sulfide, distinctly animal fatty acids, and  pungent ammonia (the fumes from a freshly opened egg will turn litmus paper  blue).  Nouveaux   Pidan   Recently, two Taiwanese food scientists devised a method for  making a striking, toned-down version of   pidan.   They minimized the chemical
stress, and thus the alteration of color and flavor, by limiting the alkaline treatment  to eight days in a solution of 5% salt and 4.2% lye. Such eggs don’t solidify on their  own. But when the unfolding and bonding are supplemented by gentle heating at  160ºF/70ºC for 10 minutes, these eggs set to a golden yolk and a colorless, clear  white!  Pine-Blossom Eggs   An especially prized variant of   pidan   is one in which the aspic-  colored white is marked throughout with tiny, pale, snowflake traceries. Such eggs  are known as   songhuadan,   or “pine-blossom” eggs. The “blossoms” turn out to be  crystals of modified amino acids, which the high alkalinity has broken off from  from the albumen proteins. They’re thus an index of protein breakdown and flavor  generation, a delicate inscription of the mineral world on the blank orb of the  animal, and an example of the unexpected delight that can lie hidden in the  crudest of preparations.   Object 2
Meat  Of all the foods that we obtain from animals and plants, meat has always been the  most highly prized. The sources of that prestige lie deep in human nature. Our  primate ancestors lived almost exclusively on plant foods until 2 million years ago,  when the changing African climate and diminishing vegetation led them to  scavenge   animal   carcasses.   Animal   flesh   and   fatty   bone   marrow   are   more  concentrated sources of food energy and tissue-building protein than nearly any  plant food. They helped feed the physical enlargement of the brain that marked  the evolution of early hominids into humans. Later, meat was the food that made it  possible for humans to migrate from Africa and thrive in cold regions of Europe  and Asia, where plant foods were seasonally scarce or even absent. Humans  became active hunters around 100,000 years ago, and it’s vividly clear from cave  paintings of wild cattle and horses that they saw their prey as embodiments of  strength and vitality. These same qualities came to be attributed to meat as well,  and a successful hunt has long been the occasion for pride, gratitude, and  celebratory feasting. Though we no longer depend on the hunt for meat, or on  meat for survival, animal flesh remains the centerpiece of meals throughout much  of the world.  Paradoxically, meat is also the most widely avoided of major foods. In order to eat  meat, we necessarily cause the death of other creatures that feel fear and pain, and  whose flesh resembles our own. Many people throughout history have found this  a morally unacceptable price for our own nourishment and pleasure. The ethical  argument against eating meat suggests that the same food that fueled the  biological evolution of modern humans now holds us back from full humaneness.  But the biological and historical influences on our eating habits have their own  force. However culturally sophisticated we may be, humans are still omnivorous  animals, and meat is a satisfying and nourishing food, an integral part of most food  traditions.  Less philosophical questions, but more immediate ones for the cook, have been  raised by the changing quality of meat over the last few decades. Thanks to the  industrial drive toward greater efficiency, and consumer worries about animal fats,  meat has been getting younger and leaner, and therefore more prone to end up
dry and flavorless. Traditional cooking methods don’t always serve modern meat  well, and cooks need to know how to adjust them.  Our species eats just about everything that moves, from insects and snails to  horses and whales. This chapter gives details for only the more common meats of  the developed world, but the general principles apply to the flesh of all animals.  Though fish and shellfish are as much flesh foods as meat and poultry, their flesh is  unusual in several ways. They are the subject of chapter 4.  Meat Fit and Unfit for Men and Gods  Outside Troy, Greek priests sacrifice cattle to Apollo: first they lifted back  the heads of the victims, slit their throats, skinned them and carved  away the meat from the thighbones and wrapped them in fat, a double  fold sliced clean and topped with strips of flesh. And the old man  burned these over dried split wood and over the quarters poured out  glistening wine while young men at his side held five-pronged forks.  Once they had burned the bones and tasted the organs they cut the  rest into pieces, pierced them with spits, roasted them to a turn and  pulled them off the fire.  — Homer,   Iliad,   ca. 700   BCE  For neither is it proper that the altars of the gods should be defiled with  murder, nor that food of this kind should be touched by men, as neither  is it fit that men should eat one another.  — Porphyry,   On Abstinence,   ca. 300   CE  Eating Animals  By the word   meat   we mean the body tissues of animals that can be eaten as food,  anything from frog legs to calf brains. We usually make a distinction between  meats proper, muscle tissue whose function is to move some part of the animal,  and   organ   meats, such innards as the liver, kidneys, intestine, and so on.
The Essence of the Animal: Mobility from Muscle  What is it that makes a creature an   animal ? The word comes from an Indo-  European root meaning “to breathe,” to move air in and out of the body. The  definitive characteristic of animals is the power to move the body and nearby parts  of the world. Most of our meats are muscles, the propulsive machinery that moves  an animal across a meadow, or through the sky or sea.  The structure of muscle tissue and meat. A piece of meat is composed of many  individual muscle cells, or fibers. The fibers are in turn filled with many fibrils, which are  assemblies of actin and myosin, the proteins of motion. When a muscle contracts, the  filaments of actin and myosin slide past each other and decrease the overall length of  the complex.  The job of any muscle is to shorten itself, or contract, when it receives the  appropriate signal from the nervous system. A muscle is made up of long, thin
cells, the muscle fibers, each of which is filled with two kinds of specialized,  contractile protein filaments intertwined with each other. This packing of protein  filaments is what makes meat such a rich nutritional source of protein. An electrical  impulse from the nerve associated with the muscle causes the protein filaments to  slide past each other, and then lock together by means of   cross-bridging,   or  forming bonds with each other. The change in relative position of the filaments  shortens   the   muscle   cell   as   a   whole,   and   the   cross   bridges   maintain   the  contraction by holding the filaments in place.  Muscle contraction. The view through a light microscope of rabbit muscle fibers,  relaxed (above) and contracted (below).  Portable Energy: Fat   Like any machine, the muscle protein machine requires  energy to run. Almost as important to animals as their propulsive machinery is an  energy supply compact enough that it doesn’t weigh them down and impede  their movement. It turns out that fat packs twice as many calories into a given  weight as carbohydrates do. This is why mobile animals store up energy almost  exclusively in fat, and unlike stationary plants, are rich rather than starchy.
Because fat is critical to animal life, most animals are able to take advantage of  abundant food by laying down large stores of fat. Many species, from insects to  fish to birds to mammals, gorge themselves in preparation for migration, breeding,  or surviving seasonal scarcity. Some migratory birds put on 50% of their lean  weight in fat in just a few weeks, then fly 3,000 to 4,000 kilometers from the  northeast United States to South America without refueling. In seasonally cold  parts of the world, fattening has been part of the resonance of autumn, the time  when wild game animals are at their plumpest and most appealing, and when  humans practice their cultural version of fattening, the harvest and storing of crops  that will see them through winter’s scarcity. Humans have long exploited the  fattening ability of our meat animals by overfeeding them before slaughter, to  make them more succulent and flavorful (p. 135).  Humans as Meat Eaters  Meat became a predictable part of the human diet beginning around 9,000 years  ago, when early peoples in the Middle East managed to tame a handful of wild  animals — first dogs, then goats and sheep, then pigs and cattle and horses — to  live alongside them. Livestock not only transformed inedible grass and scraps into  nutritious   meat,   but   constituted   a   walking   larder,   a   store   of   concentrated  nourishment that could be harvested whenever it was needed. Because they were  adaptable enough to submit to human control, our meat animals have flourished  and now number in the billions, while many wild animals are being squeezed by  the growth of cities and farmlands into ever smaller habitats, and their populations  are declining.  The History of Meat Consumption  The Scarcity of Meat in Agricultural Societies   Around the time that our  ancestors domesticated animals, they also began to cultivate a number of grasses,  plants that grow in extensive stands and produce large numbers of nutritious  seeds. This was the beginning of agriculture. With the arrival of domesticated  barley and wheat, rice and maize, nomadic peoples settled down to farm the land  and produce food, populations boomed — and most people ate very little meat.  Grain crops are simply a far more efficient form of nourishment than animals  grazing on the same land, so meat became relatively expensive, a luxury reserved
for the rulers. From the prehistoric invention of agriculture to the Industrial  Revolution, the great majority of people on the planet lived on cereal gruels and  breads.   Beginning   with   Europe   and   the   Americas   in   the   19th   century,  industrialization   has   generally   made   meat   less   expensive   and   more   widely  available thanks to the development of managed pastures and formulated feeds,  the intensive breeding of animals for efficient meat production, and improved  transportation from farms to cities. But in less developed parts of the world, meat  is still a luxury reserved for the wealthy few.  Food Words:   Meat  The English word   meat   has not always meant animal flesh, and its evolution  indicates a shift in the eating habits of English-speaking people. In the   Oxford  English Dictionary ’s first citation for   meat,   from the year 900, the word meant  solid food in general, in contrast to drink. A vestige of this sense survives  today in the habit of referring to the meat of nuts. It wasn’t until 1300 that  meat   was used for the flesh of animals, and not until even later that this  definition displaced the earlier one as animal flesh became preeminent in the  English diet, in preference if not in quantity. (The same transformation can be  traced in the French word   viande. ) One sign of this preference is Charles  Carter’s 1732   Compleat City and Country Cook,   which devotes 50 pages to  meat dishes, 25 to poultry, and 40 to fish, but only 25 to vegetables and a  handful to breads and pastries.  Abundant Meat in North America   From the beginning, Americans have enjoyed  an abundance of meat made possible by the size and richness of the continent. In  the 19th century, as the country became urbanized and more people lived away  from the farm, meats were barreled in salt to preserve them in transit and in the  shops; salt pork was as much a staple food as bread (hence such phrases as  “scraping the bottom of the barrel” and “pork-barrel politics”). In the 1870s a wider  distribution of fresh meat, especially beef, was made possible by several advances,  including the growth of the cattle industry in the West, the introduction of cattle  cars on the railroads, and the development of the refrigerated railroad car by  Gustavus Swift and Philip Armour.
Today, with one fifteenth of the world’s population, the United States eats one  third of the world’s meat. Meat consumption on this scale is possible only in  wealthy societies like our own, because animal flesh remains a much less efficient  source of nourishment than plant protein. It takes much less grain to feed a person  than it does to feed a steer or chicken in order to feed a person. Even today, with  advanced methods of production, it takes 2 pounds of grain to get 1 pound of  chicken meat, and the ratios are 4 to 1 for pork, 8 to 1 for beef. We can afford to  depend on animals as a major source of food only because we have a surplus of  seed proteins.  Food Words: Animals and Their Meats  As the novelist Walter Scott and others pointed out long ago, the Norman  Conquest of Britain in 1066 caused a split in the English vocabulary for  common meats. The Saxons had their own Germanic names for the animals  —   ox, steer, cow, heifer,   and   calf ;   sheep, ram, wether, ewe,   and   lamb; swine, hog,  gilt, sow,   and   pig   — and named their flesh by attaching “meat of” to the  animal name. When French became the language of the English nobility in  the centuries following the Conquest, the animal names survived in the  countryside, but the prepared meats were rechristened in the fashion of the  court cooks: the first recipe books in English call for   beef   (from the French  boeuf ),   veal   ( veau ),   mutton   ( mouton ), and   pork   ( porc ).  Why Do People Love Meat?  If meat eating helped our species survive and then thrive across the globe, then it’s  understandable why many peoples fell into the habit, and why meat would have a  significant place in human culture and tradition. But the deepest satisfaction in  eating meat probably comes from instinct and biology. Before we became  creatures of culture, nutritional wisdom was built into our sensory system, our  taste buds, odor receptors, and brain. Our taste buds in particular are designed to  help us recognize and pursue important nutrients: we have receptors for essential  salts, for energy-rich sugars, for amino acids, the building blocks of proteins, for
energy-bearing molecules called nucleotides. Raw meat triggers all these tastes,  because muscle cells are relatively fragile, and because they’re biochemically very  active. The cells in a plant leaf or seed, by contrast, are protected by tough cell  walls that prevent much of their contents from being freed by chewing, and their  protein and starch are locked up in inert storage granules. Meat is thus mouth-  filling in a way that few plant foods are. Its rich aroma when cooked comes from  the same biochemical complexity.  Meat and Health  Meat’s Ancient and Immediate Nutritional Advantages…  The meat of wild animals was by far the most concentrated natural source of  protein and iron in the diet of our earliest human ancestors, and along with oily  nuts, the most concentrated source of energy. (It’s also unsurpassed for several B  vitamins.) Thanks to the combination of meat, calcium-rich leaf foods, and a  vigorous life, the early hunter-gatherers were robust, with strong skeletons, jaws,  and teeth. When agriculture and settled life developed in the Middle East  beginning 10,000 years ago, human diet and activity narrowed considerably. Meats  and vegetables were displaced from the diet of early farmers by easily grown  starchy grains that are relatively poor in calcium, iron, and protein. With this and  the higher prevalence of infectious disease caused by population growth and  crowding, the rise of agriculture brought about a general decline in human stature,  bone strength, and dental health.  A return to something like the robustness of the hunter-gatherers came to the  industrialized world beginning late in the 19th century. This broad improvement in  stature and life expectancy owed a great deal to improvements in medicine and  especially public hygiene (water quality, waste treatment), but the growing  nutritional contribution of meat and milk also played an essential role.  …And Modern, Long-Term Disadvantages  By the middle of the 20th century, we had a pretty good understanding of the  nutritional requirements for day-to-day good health. Most people in the West had  plenty of food, and life expectancy had risen to seven or eight decades. Medical
research then began to concentrate on the role of nutrition in the diseases that cut  the good life short, mainly heart disease and cancer. And here meat and its strong  appeal turned out to have a significant disadvantage: a diet high in meat is  associated with a higher risk of developing heart disease and cancer. In our  postindustrial life of physical inactivity and essentially unlimited ability to indulge  our taste for meat, meat’s otherwise valuable endowment of energy contributes to  obesity, which increases the risk of various diseases. The saturated fats typical of  meats raise blood cholesterol levels and can contribute to heart disease. And to  the extent that meat displaces from our diet the vegetables and fruits that help  fight heart disease and cancer (p. 255), it increases our vulnerability to both.  It’s prudent, then, to temper our species’ infatuation with meat. It helped make us  what we are, but now it can help unmake us. We should eat meat in moderation,  and accompany it with the vegetables and fruits that complement its nutritional  strengths and limitations.  Minimizing Toxic By-Products in Cooked Meats   We should also prepare meat  with care. Scientists have identified three families of chemicals created during  meat preparation that damage DNA and cause cancers in laboratory animals, and  that may increase our risk of developing cancer of the large intestine.  Heterocyclic Amines   HCAs are formed at high temperatures by the reaction of  minor   meat   components   (creatine   and   creatinine)   with   amino   acids.   HCA  production is generally greatest at the meat surface where the temperature is  highest and the meat juices collect, and on meats that are grilled, broiled, or fried  well done. Oven roasting leaves relatively few HCAs on the meat but large  amounts in the pan drippings. Acid marinades reduce HCA production, as does  cooking gently and aiming for a rare or medium doneness. Vegetables, fruits, and  acidophilus bacteria (p. 47) appear to bind HCAs in the digestive tract and prevent  them from causing damage.  Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbons   PAHs are created when nearly any organic  material, including wood and fat, is heated to the point that it begins to burn (p.  448). Cooking over a smoky wood fire therefore deposits PAHs from the wood on  meat. A charcoal fire is largely smokeless, but will create PAHs from fat if the fat is  allowed to fall and burn on the coals, or if the fat ignites on the meat surface itself.  Small quantities of PAHs can also be formed during high-temperature frying. The  PAH hazard can be minimized by grilling over wood only when it has been reduced
to coals, by leaving the grill uncovered so that soot and vapors can dissipate, by  avoiding fat flareups, and by eating smoked meats only rarely.  Nitrosamines   Nitrosamines are formed when nitrogen-containing groups on  amino acids and related compounds combine with nitrite, a chemical that has  been used for millennia in salt-cured meats, and that suppresses the bacterium  that causes botulism (p. 174). This reaction between amino acids and nitrites takes  place both in our digestive system and in very hot frying pans. Nitrosamines are  known to be powerful DNA-damaging chemicals, yet at present there’s no clear  evidence that the nitrites in cured meats increase the risk of developing cancer.  Still, it’s probably prudent to eat cured meats in moderation and cook them gently.  Meat and Food-Borne Infections  Beyond the possibility that it may chip away at our longevity by contributing to  heart disease and cancer, meat can also pose the much more immediate hazard of  causing infection by disease microbes. This problem remains all too common.  Bacterial Infection   Exactly because it is a nutritious material, meat is especially  vulnerable to colonization by microbes, mainly bacteria. And because animal skins  and digestive tracts are rich reservoirs of bacteria, it’s inevitable that initially clean  meat surfaces will be contaminated during slaughter and the removal of skin,  feathers,   and   innards.   The   problem   is   magnified   in   standard   mechanized  operations, where carcasses are handled less carefully than they would be by  skilled butchers, and where a single infected carcass is more likely to contaminate  others. Most bacteria are harmless and simply spoil the meat by consuming its  nutrients and eventually generating unpleasant smells and a slimy surface. A  number, however, can invade the cells of our digestive system, and produce toxins  to destroy the host cells and defenses and to speed their getaway from the body.  The two most prominent causes of serious meat-borne illness are   Salmonella   and  E. coli.  Salmonella , a genus that includes more than 2,000 distinct bacterial types, causes  more serious food-borne disease in Europe and North America than any other  microbe, and appears to be on the rise. It’s a resilient group, adaptable to extremes  of temperature, acidity, and moisture, and found in most if not all animals,  including fish. In the United States it’s especially prevalent in poultry and eggs,  apparently thanks to the practices of industrial-scale poultry farming: recycling
animal by-products (feathers, viscera) as feed for the next generation of animals,  and crowding the animals together in very close confinement, both of which favor  the spread of the bacteria. Salmonella often have no obvious effect on the animal  carriers, but in humans can cause diarrhea and chronic infection in other parts of  the body.  Escherichia coli   is the collective name for many related strains of bacteria that are  normal residents of the intestines of warm-blooded animals, including humans.  But several strains are aliens, and if ingested will invade the cells of the digestive  tract and cause illness. The most notorious   E. coli,   and the most dangerous, is a  special strain called O157:H7 that causes bloody diarrhea and sometimes kidney  failure, especially in children. In the United States, about a third of people  diagnosed with   E. coli   O157:H7 need to be hospitalized, and about 5% die.   E. coli  O157:H7 is harbored in cattle, especially calves, and other animals, but has little if  any effect on them. Ground beef is by far the most common source of   E. coli  O157:H7 infection. Grinding mixes and spreads what   may be only a small  contaminated portion throughout the entire mass of meat.  Prevention   Prevention of bacterial infection begins with the well warranted  assumption that all meat has been contaminated with at least some disease  bacteria. It requires measures to ensure that those bacteria are not spread to other  foods, and are eliminated from the meats during cooking. Hands, knives, cutting  boards, and countertops used to prepare meats should be cleaned with hot soapy  water before being used to prepare other foods.   E. coli   are killed at 155ºF/68ºC, so  ground meats are safest if their center gets at least this hot. Salmonella and other  bacteria can multiply at significant rates between 40 and 140ºF/5–60ºC, so meats  should not be left in this range for more than two hours. Buffet dishes should be  kept hot, and leftovers promptly refrigerated and reheated at least to 160ºF/70ºC.  Trichinosis   Trichinosis is a disease caused by infection with the cysts of a small  parasitic   worm,   Trichina   spiralis.   In   the   United   States,   trichinosis   was   long  associated with undercooked pork from pigs fed garbage that sometimes included  infected rodents or other animals. Uncooked garbage was banned as pork feed in  1980, and since then the incidence of trichinosis in the United States has declined  to fewer than ten cases annually. Most of these are not from pork, but from such  game meats as bear, boar, and walrus.  For many years it was recommended that pork be cooked past well done to ensure
the elimination of trichinae. It’s now known that a temperature of 137ºF/58ºC, a  medium doneness, is sufficient to kill the parasite in meat; aiming for 150ºF/65ºC  gives reasonable safety margin. Trichinae can also be eliminated by frozen storage  for a period of at least 20 days at or lower than 5ºF/–15ºC.  “Mad Cow Disease”  “Mad cow disease” is the common name for bovine spongiform encephalopathy,  or BSE, a disease that slowly destroys the brains of cattle. It’s an especially  worrisome disease because the agent of infection is a nonliving protein particle  that cannot be destroyed by cooking, and that appears to cause a similar and fatal  disease in people who eat infected beef. We still have a lot to learn about it.  BSE originated in the early 1980s when cattle were fed by-products from sheep  suffering from a brain disease called scrapie, whose cause appears to be a  chemically stable protein aggregate called a prion. The sheep prions somehow  adapted to their new host and began to cause brain disease in the cattle.  Humans are not susceptible to sheep scrapie. But there’s a mainly hereditary  human brain disease similar to scrapie and caused by a similar prion; it is called  Creutzfeldt-Jakob   disease   (CJD),   typically   strikes   old   people   with   loss   of  coordination and then dementia, and eventually kills them. In 1995 and 1996, ten  relatively young Britons died from a new variant of CJD, and the prion agent found  in their bodies was closely related to the BSE prion. This strongly suggests that  humans can contract a devastating disease by eating meat from BSE-infected  cattle. The cattle brain, spinal cord, and retina are thought to be the tissues in  which prions are concentrated, but a 2004 report suggests that they may also be  found in muscles and thus in common cuts of beef.  BSE appears to have been eliminated in Britain thanks to the culling of affected  herds, changes in feeding, and surveillance. But diseased cattle have turned up  elsewhere in Europe, as well as in the United States, Canada, and Japan. As a  precautionary measure, a number of countries have suspended some traditional  practices at least temporarily. These include eating flavorful meat from older  animals (which are more likely to carry BSE), as well as beef brains, sweetbreads  and spleen (immune-system organs), and intestines (which contain immune-  system tissues). Some countries also forbid the use of “mechanically recovered  meat” — tiny scraps removed from the skeleton by machine and incorporated into
ground beef — from the head and spinal column. These rules will probably be  modified as rapid tests for the animal disease are developed and implemented,  and as we learn more about how it is transmitted to people.  To date, the known human death toll from BSE-infected beef numbers in the low  hundreds, and the overall risk of contracting the prion disease from beef appears  to be very small.  Controversies in Modern Meat Production  Meat production is big business. In the United States just a few decades ago, it was  second only to automobile manufacturing. Both industry and government have  long underwritten research on innovative ways to control meat production and its  costs. The result has been a reliable supply of relatively inexpensive meat, but also  a production system increasingly distant from its origins in the family farmer’s  pasture, pigsty, and chicken coop, and troubling in various ways. Many innovations  involve the use of chemicals to manipulate animal metabolism. These chemicals  act as drugs in the animals, and raise worries that they may influence human  health as well. Other innovations involve the animals’ living conditions, which have  become increasingly artificial and crowded, and their feed, which often includes  reprocessed   waste   materials   from   various   agricultural   industries,   and   which  contributed to the origin of mad cow disease and the persistence of salmonella in  chickens. The scale and concentration of modern meat production, with hundreds  of thousands of animals confined in a single facility, have caused significant water,  soil, and air pollution. Enough consumers and producers have become uneasy  about these developments that there is now a modest segment of the industry  devoted to meats raised more traditionally, on a smaller scale, and with more  attention to the quality of the animals’ life and meat.  Hormones  The manipulation of animal hormones is an ancient technology. Farmers have  castrated male animals for thousands of years to make them more docile. Testicle  removal not only prevents   the production   of sex hormones   that   stimulate  aggressive behavior, but also turns out to favor the production of fat tissue over  muscle. This is why steers and capons have long been preferred as meat animals  over bulls and cocks. The modern preference for lean meat has led some producers
to raise uncastrated animals, or to replace certain hormones in castrates. Several  natural and synthetic hormones, including estrogen and testosterone, produce  leaner, more muscular cattle more rapidly and on less feed. There is ongoing  research into a variety of growth factors and other drugs that would help  producers fine-tune the growth and proportions of fat to lean in cattle and other  meat animals.  Currently, beef producers are allowed to treat meat cattle with six hormones in the  United States, Canada, Australia, and New Zealand, but not in Europe. Hormone  treatments were outlawed in the European Economic Community in 1989 in  response to well-publicized abuses; a few Italian veal producers injected their  calves with large quantities of the banned steroid DES, which ended up in bottled  baby food and caused changes in the sexual organs of some infants. Laboratory  studies indicate that meat from animals treated with allowed hormone levels  contains only minute hormone residues, and that these residues are harmless  when ingested by humans.  Antibiotics  Efficient industrial-scale meat production requires that large numbers of animals  be raised in close confinement, a situation that favors the rapid spread of disease.  In order to control animal pathogens, many producers routinely add antibiotics to  their feed. This practice turns out to have the additional advantage of increasing  growth rate and feed efficiency.  Antibiotic residues in meat are minute and apparently insignificant. However,  there’s good evidence that the use of antibiotics in livestock has encouraged the  evolution of antibiotic-resistant campylobacter and salmonella bacteria, and that  these bacteria have caused illness in U.S. consumers. Because resistant bacteria are  more difficult to control, Europe and Japan restrict the use of antibiotics in animals.  Humane Meat Production  To many people, the mass production of livestock is itself undesirable. In a series of  legislative   acts   and   executive   orders   dating   back   to   1978,   Switzerland   has  mandated that producers accommodate the needs of their animals for such things  as living space, access to the outdoors, and natural light, and limit the size of herds  and flocks. The European Union is also adopting animal welfare guidelines for
meat production, and producers in a number of countries have grouped together  to establish and monitor their own voluntary guidelines.  Mass production has certainly made meat a more affordable food than it would be  otherwise. But because we raise meat animals in order to eat them, it seems only  just that we try to make their brief lives as satisfying as possible. It would certainly  be a challenge to raise meat animals economically while taking their nature and  instincts into account and allowing them the opportunity to roam, nest, and  nurture their young. But it’s a challenge at least as worthy as finding a way to trim  another 1% from production costs.  Invisible Animals  Historian William Cronon has written eloquently about the disappearance of our  food animals as the system of meat production changed in the 19th century:  Formerly, a person could not easily have forgotten that pork and beef  were the creation of an intricate, symbiotic partnership between  animals and human beings. One was not likely to forget that pigs and  cattle had died so that people might eat, for one saw them grazing in  familiar pastures, and regularly visited the barnyards and butcher  shops where they gave up their lives in the service of one’s daily meal….  As time went on, fewer of those who ate meat could say that they had  ever seen the living creature whose flesh they were chewing; fewer still  could say that they had actually killed the animal themselves. In the  packers’ world, it was easy not to remember that eating was a moral  act inextricably bound to killing…. Meat was a neatly wrapped  package one bought at the market. Nature did not have much to do  with it.  — William Cronon,   Nature’s Metropolis: Chicago and the Great West,   1991  The Structure and Qualities of Meat  Lean meat is made up of three basic materials: it’s about 75% water, 20% protein,
and 3% fat. These materials are woven into three kinds of tissue. The main tissue is  the mass of muscle cells, the long fibers that cause movement when they contract  and relax. Surrounding the muscle fibers is the connective tissue, a kind of living  glue that harnesses the fibers together and to the bones that they move. And  interspersed among the fibers and connective tissue are groups of fat cells, which  store fat as a source of energy for the muscle fibers. The qualities of meat — its  texture, color, and flavor — are determined to a large extent by the arrangement  and relative proportions of the muscle fibers, connective tissue, and fat tissue.  Muscle Tissues and Meat Texture  Muscle Fibers   When we look at a piece of meat, most of what we see are bundles  of muscle cells, the fibers that do the moving. A single fiber is very thin, around the  thickness of a human hair (a tenth to a hundredth of a millimeter in diameter), but  it can be as long as the whole muscle. The muscle fibers are organized in bundles,  the larger fibers that we can easily see and tease apart in well-cooked meat.  The basic texture of meat, dense and firm, comes from the mass of muscle fibers,  which   cooking   makes   denser,   dryer,   and   tougher.   And   their   elongated  arrangement accounts for the “grain” of meat. Cut parallel to the bundles and you  see them from the side, lined up like the logs of a cabin wall; cut across the  bundles and you see just their ends. It’s easier to push fiber bundles apart from  each other than to break the bundles themselves, so it’s easier to chew along the  direction of the fibers than across them. We usually carve meat   across   the grain, so  that we can chew   with   the grain.  Muscle fibers are small in diameter when the animal is young and its muscles little  used. As it grows and exercises, its muscles get stronger by enlarging — not by  increasing the number of fibers, but by increasing the number of contractile  protein fibrils within the individual fibers. That is, the number of muscle cells stays  the same, but they get thicker. The more protein fibrils there are packed together  in the cells, the harder it is to cut across them. So the meat of older, well exercised  animals is tougher than the meat of young animals.  Connective Tissue   Connective tissue is the physical harness for all the other  tissues in the body, muscle included. It connects individual cells and tissues to  each other, thus organizing and coordinating their actions. Invisibly thin layers of  connective   tissue   surround   each   muscle   fiber   and   hold   neighboring   fibers
together in bundles, then merge to form the large, silver-white sheets that  organize fiber bundles into muscles, and the translucent tendons that join muscles  to bones. When the fibers contract, they pull this harness of connective tissue with  them, and the harness pulls the bones. The more force that a muscle exerts, the  more connective tissue it needs for reinforcement, and the stronger the tissue  needs to be. So as an animal’s growth and exercise bulk up the muscle fibers, they  also bulk up and toughen the connective tissue.  Connective tissue includes some living cells, but consists mainly of molecules that  the cells secrete into the large spaces between them. The most important of these  molecules for the cook are the protein filaments that run throughout the tissue  and reinforce it. One, a protein called   elastin   for its stretchiness, is the main  component of blood vessel walls and ligaments, and is especially tough; its cross-  links cannot be broken by the heat of cooking. Fortunately there isn’t much of it in  most muscle tissue.  Connective tissue. Muscle fibers are bundled, held in place, and reinforced by sheets of  connective tissue. The more connective tissue in a given piece of meat, the tougher its  texture.  The major connective-tissue filament is the protein called   collagen,   which makes  up about a third of all the protein in the animal body, and is concentrated in skin,  tendons, and bones. The name comes from the Greek for “glue producing,” because  when it’s heated in water, solid, tough collagen partly dissolves into sticky   gelatin  (p. 597). So unlike the muscle fibers, which become tougher with cooking, the  connective tissue becomes softer. An animal starts out life with a large amount of  collagen that’s easily dissolved into gelatin. As it grows and its muscles work, its
total collagen supply declines, but the filaments that remain are more highly  crosslinked and less soluble in hot water. This is why cooked veal seems gelatinous  and tender, mature beef less gelatinous and tougher.  Fat Tissue   Fat tissue is a special form of connective tissue, one in which some of  the cells take on the role of storing energy. Animals form fat tissue in three  different parts of the body: just under the skin, where it can provide insulation as  well as energy; in well-defined deposits in the body cavity, often around the  kidneys, intestine, and heart; and in the connective tissue separating muscles and  the bundles within muscles. The term “marbling” is used to describe the pattern of  white splotches in the red matrix of muscle.  Tissues and Textures   The texture of tender meat is as distinctive and satisfying as  its flavor: a “meaty” food is something you can sink your teeth into, dense and  substantial, initially resistant to the tooth but soon giving way as it liberates its  flavor. Toughness is a resistance to chewing that persists long enough to become  unpleasant. Toughness can come from the muscle fibers, the connective tissue  surrounding them, and from the lack of marbling fat.  Generally, the toughness of a cut of meat is determined by where it comes from in  the animal’s body, and by the animal’s age and activity. Get down on all fours and  “graze,” and you’ll notice that the neck, shoulders, chest, and front limbs all work  hard, while the back is more relaxed. Shoulders and legs are used continually in  walking and standing, and include a number of different muscles and their  connective-tissue sheaths. They are therefore relatively tough. The tenderloin is  appropriately named because it is a single muscle with little internal connective  tissue that runs along the back and gets little action; it’s tender. Bird legs are  tougher than breasts for the same reasons; the protein in chicken legs is 5–8%  collagen compared to 2% in the breast. Younger animals — veal, lamb, pork, and  chicken all come from younger animals than beef does — have tenderer muscle  fibers because they are smaller and less exercised; and the collagen in their  connective tissue is more rapidly and completely converted to gelatin than older,  more cross-linked collagen.  Fat contributes to the apparent tenderness of meat in three ways: fat cells interrupt  and weaken the sheet of connective tissue and the mass of muscle fibers; fat melts  when heated rather than drying out and stiffening as the fibers do; and it  lubricates the tissue, helping to separate fiber from fiber. Without much fat,
otherwise tender meat becomes compacted, dry, and tough. Beef shoulder  muscles contain more connective tissue than the leg muscles, but they also  include more fat, and therefore make more succulent dishes.  Muscle Fiber Types: Meat Color  Why do chickens have both white and dark meat, and why do the two kinds of  meat taste different? Why is veal pale and delicate, beef red and robust? The key is  the muscle fiber. There are several different kinds of muscle fiber, each designed for  a particular kind of work, and each with its own color and flavor.  White and Red Fibers   Animals move in two basic ways. They move suddenly,  rapidly, and briefly, for example when a startled pheasant explodes into the air and  lands a few hundred yards away. And they move deliberately and persistently, for  example when the same pheasant supports its body weight on its legs as it stands  and walks; or a steer stands and chews its cud. There are two basic kinds of muscle  fibers that execute these movements, the white fibers of pheasant and chicken  breasts, and the red fibers of bird and steer legs. The two types differ in many  biochemical details, but the most significant difference is the energy supply each  uses.  White Muscle Fibers   White muscle fibers specialize in exerting force rapidly and  briefly. They are fueled by a small store of a carbohydrate called glycogen, which is  already in the fibers, and is rapidly converted into energy by enzymes right in the  cell fluids. White cells use oxygen to burn glycogen, but if necessary they can  generate their energy faster than the blood can deliver oxygen. When they do so, a  waste   product,   lactic   acid,   accumulates   until   more   oxygen   arrives.   This  accumulation of lactic acid limits the cells’ endurance, as does their limited fuel  supply. This is why white cells work best in short intermittent bursts with long rest  periods in between, during which the lactic acid can be removed and glycogen  replaced.  Red Muscle Fibers   Red muscle fibers are used for prolonged efforts. They are  fueled primarily by fat, whose metabolism absolutely requires oxygen, and obtain  both fat (in the form of fatty acids) and oxygen from the blood. Red fibers are  relatively thin, so that fatty acids and oxygen can diffuse into them from the blood  more easily. They also contain their own droplets of fat, and the biochemical
machinery necessary to convert it into energy. This machinery includes two  proteins that give red cells their color.   Myoglobin,   a relative of the oxygen-carrying  hemoglobin that makes blood red, receives oxygen from the blood, temporarily  stores it, and then passes it to the fat-oxidizing proteins. And among the fat  oxidizers are the   cytochromes,   which like hemoglobin and myoglobin contain iron  and are dark in color. The greater the oxygen needs of the fiber, and the more it’s  exercised, the more myoglobin and cytochromes it will contain. The muscles of  young cattle and sheep are typically 0.3% myoglobin by weight and relatively pale,  but the muscles of the constantly moving whale, which must store large amounts  of oxygen during its prolonged dives, have 25 times more myoglobin in their cells,  and are nearly black.  White and red muscle fibers. Fast muscle cells are thicker than slow cells, contain little  oxygen-storing myoglobin pigment and few fat-burning mitochondria. The thinness  of slow, red muscle fibers speeds the diffusion of oxygen from the external blood  supply to the center of the fibers.  Fiber Proportions: White Meat and Dark Meat   Because most animal muscles are  used for both rapid and slow movements, they contain both white and red muscle  fibers, as well as hybrid fibers that combine some characteristics of the other two.  The proportions of the different fibers in a given muscle depend on the inherited  genetic design for that muscle and the actual patterns of muscle use. Frogs and  rabbits, which make quick, sporadic movements and use very few of their skeletal  muscles continuously, have very pale flesh consisting mainly of white fast fibers,  while the cheek muscles of ruminating, perpetually cud-chewing steers are  exclusively red slow fibers. Chickens and turkeys fly only when startled, run  occasionally,   and   mostly   stand   and   walk;   so   their   breast   muscles   consist  predominantly of white fibers, while their leg muscles are on average half white  fibers, half red. The breast muscles of such migratory birds as ducks and pigeons  are predominantly red fibers because they’re designed to help the birds fly for
hundreds of miles at a time.  Muscle Pigments   The principal pigment in meat is the oxygen-storing protein  myoglobin,   which can assume several different forms and hues depending on its  chemical environment. Myoglobin consists of two connected structures: a kind of  molecular cage with an iron atom at the center, and an attached protein. When the  iron is holding onto a molecule of oxygen, myoglobin is bright red. When the  oxygen is pulled away by enzymes in the muscle cell that need it, the myoglobin  becomes dark purple. (Similarly, hemoglobin is red in our arteries because it’s fresh  from our lungs, and blue in our veins because it has unloaded oxygen into our  cells.) And when oxygen manages to rob the iron atom of an electron and then  escape, the iron atom loses its ability to hold oxygen at all, has to settle for a water  molecule, and the myoglobin becomes brown.  Meat pigments. Left: The heme group, a carbon-ring structure at the center of both  hemoglobin and myoglobin molecules that holds oxygen for use by the animal body’s  cells. The protein portion of these molecules, the globin, is a long, folded chain of  amino acids, and is not shown here. Right: Three different states of the heme group in  uncooked meat. In the absence of oxygen, myoglobin is purple. Myoglobin that has  bound a molecule of oxygen gas is red. When little oxygen is available for some time,  the iron atom in the heme group is readily oxidized — robbed of an electron — and  the resulting pigment molecule is brownish (right).  Each of these myoglobins — the red, the purple, and the brown — is present in red  meat. Their relative proportions, and so the meat’s appearance, are determined by  several factors: the amount of oxygen available, the activity of oxygen-consuming  enzymes in the muscle tissue, and the activity of enzymes that can resupply brown  myoglobin with an electron, which turns it purple again. Acidity, temperature, and
salt concentration also matter; if any is high enough to destabilize the attached  protein, myoglobin is more likely to lose an electron and turn brown. Generally,  fresh red meat with active enzyme systems will be red on the surface, where  oxygen is abundant, and purple inside, where the little oxygen that diffuses  through is consumed by enzymes. When we cut into raw meat or into a rare steak,  the initially purple interior quickly “blooms,” or reddens, thanks to its direct  exposure to the air. Similarly, vacuum-packed meat appears purple due to the  absence of oxygen, and reddens only when removed from the package.  The pink color of salt-cured meats comes from yet another alteration of the  myoglobin molecule (p. 148).  Muscle Fibers, Tissues, and Meat Flavor  The main source of meat’s great appeal is its flavor. Meat flavor has two aspects:  what might be called generic meatiness, and the special aromas that characterize  meats from different animals. Meatiness is largely provided by the muscle fibers,  character aromas by the fat tissue.  Muscle Fibers: The Flavor of Action   Meaty flavor is a combination of mouth-  filling taste sensations and a characteristic, rich aroma. Both arise from the proteins  and energy-generating machinery of the muscle fibers — after they have been  broken down into small pieces by the muscle’s enzymes and by the heat of  cooking. Some of these pieces — single amino acids and short chains of them,  sugars, fatty acids, nucleotides, and salts — are what stimulate the tongue with  sweet, sour, salty, and savory sensations. And when they’re heated, they react with  each other to form hundreds of aromatic compounds. In general, well-exercised  muscle with a high proportion of red fibers (chicken leg, beef) makes more  flavorful meat than less exercised, predominantly white-fibered muscle (chicken  breast, veal). Red fibers contain more materials with the potential for generating  flavor, in particular fat droplets and fat-like components of the membranes that  house the cytochromes. They also have more substances that help break these  flavor precursors down into flavorful pieces, including the iron atoms in myoglobin  and cytochromes, the oxygen that those molecules hold, and the enzymes that  convert fat into energy and recycle the cell’s proteins.  This connection between exercise and flavor has been known for a very long time.  Nearly 200 years ago, Brillat-Savarin made fun of “those gastronomes who pretend
to have discovered the special flavor of the leg upon which a sleeping pheasant  rests his weight.”  Steer anatomy and cuts of beef. The shoulder, arm, and leg do most of the work of  supporting the animal. They therefore contain a large proportion of reinforcing  connective tissue, are tough, and best cooked thoroughly for an hour or more to  dissolve the connective-tissue collagen into gelatin. The rib, short loin, and sirloin do  less work, are generally the tenderest cuts, and are tender even when cooked briefly to  a medium doneness.  Fat: The Flavor of the Tribe   The machinery of the red or white muscle fiber is  much the same no matter what the animal, because it has the specific job of  generating movement. Fat cells, on the other hand, are essentially storage tissue,  and any sort of fat-soluble material can end up in them. So the contents of fat  tissue vary from species to species, and are also affected by the animal’s diet and  resident gastrointestinal microbes. It’s largely the contents of the fat tissue that  give beef, lamb, pork, and chicken their distinctive flavors, which are composites of  many different kinds of aroma molecules. The fat molecules themselves can be  transformed by heat and oxygen into molecules that smell fruity or floral, nutty or  “green,” with   the   relative   proportions   depending   on   the   nature   of   the   fat.  Compounds from forage plants contribute to the “cowy” flavor of beef. Lambs and  sheep store a number of unusual molecules, including branched-chain fatty acids
that their livers produce from a compound generated by the microbes in their  rumen, and thymol, the same molecule that gives thyme its aroma. The “piggy”  flavor of pork and gamy flavor of duck are thought to come from intestinal  microbes and their fat-soluble products of amino-acid metabolism, while the  “sweetness” in pork aroma comes from a kind of molecule that also gives coconut  and peach their character (lactones).  Grass versus Grain   In general, grass or forage feeding results in stronger-tasting  meat than grain or concentrate feeding, thanks to the plants’ high content of  various odorous substances, reactive polyunsaturated fatty acids, and chlorophyll,  which rumen microbes convert into chemicals called terpenes, relatives of the  aroma   compounds   in   many   herbs   and   spices   (p.   273).   Another   important  contributor to grass-fed flavor is skatole, which on its own smells like manure! The  deep “beefy” flavor of beef, however, is more prominent in grain-fed animals. And  the flavor carried in fat gets stronger as animals get older, as more of the flavor  compounds are put into storage. This is why lamb is generally more popular than  mutton from mature sheep.  Meat Pigments Are a Good Source of Iron  One of meat’s nutritional strong points is that the body absorbs its iron more  efficiently than it does iron from vegetable sources. The reason for this is not  well understood, but it’s possible that the pigment proteins hold onto iron  and prevent it from being bound up with indigestible plant compounds. Meat  color is a good indicator of its iron content; red beef and lamb contain on  average two to three times as much as pale pork; relatively dark pork shoulder  contains twice as much as the loin.  Production Methods and Meat Quality  Full-flavored meat comes from animals that have led a full life. However, exercise  and age also increase muscle fiber diameter and the cross-linking of connective  tissue: so a full life also means tougher meat. In centuries past, most people ate  mature, tough, strongly flavored meat, and developed long-cooked recipes to
soften it. Today, most of us eat young, tender, mild meat that is at its best quickly  cooked; long-cooking often dries it out. This shift in meat quality has resulted from  a shift in the way the animals are raised.  Rural and Urban Styles of Meat   There are two traditional, indeed ancient ways of  obtaining meat from animals, and they produce meats of distinctive qualities.  One method is to raise animals primarily for their value as living companions —  oxen and horses for their work in the fields, laying hens for their eggs, cows and  sheep and goats for their milk and for wool — and turn them into meat only when  they are no longer productive. In this system, slaughtering animals for meat is the  last use of a resource that is more valuable when alive. The meat comes from  mature animals, and is therefore well exercised and relatively tough, lean but  flavorful. This method was by far the most common one from prehistoric times  until the 19th century.  The second way of obtaining meat from animals is to raise the animals exclusively  for that purpose. This means feeding the animals well, sparing them unnecessary  exercise, and slaughtering them young to obtain tender, mild, fatty flesh. This  method also goes back to prehistory, when it was applied to pigs and to the  otherwise useless male offspring of hens and dairy animals. With the rise of cities,  meat animals were confined and fattened exclusively for the urban elite who could  afford such a luxury, an art represented in Egyptian murals and described by  Roman writers.  For   many   centuries,   rural   and   urban   meats   coexisted,   and   inspired   the  development of two distinct styles of meat preparation: roasting for the tender,  fattened meats of the wealthy, and stewing for the tough, lean meats of the  peasants.  The Rural Style Disappears   With the Industrial Revolution, draft animals were  slowly replaced by machines. City populations and the middle class grew, and  along with them the demand for meat, which encouraged the rise of large-scale  specialized meat production. In 1927 the U.S. Department of Agriculture enshrined  the identification of quality with urban-style fattiness when it based its beef  grading system on the amount of “marbling” fat deposited within the muscles (see  box). Meat from mature animals began to disappear in North America, and ever  more efficient industrial production took the urban style to new extremes.  Mass Production Favors Immaturity   Today nearly all meat comes from animals
raised exclusively for that purpose. Mass production methods are dictated by a  simple economic imperative: the meat should be produced at minimum cost,  which generally means in the shortest possible time. Animals are now confined to  minimize   the   expenditure   of   feed   on   unnecessary   movement,   and   they’re  slaughtered before they reach adulthood, when the growth of their muscles slows  down. Rapid, confined growth favors the production of white muscle fibers, so  modern meats are relatively pale. They’re also tender, because the animals get little  exercise, because rapid growth means that their connective-tissue collagen is  continuously taken apart and rebuilt and develops fewer strong cross-links, and  because rapid growth means high levels of the protein-breaking enzymes that  tenderize meat during aging (p. 143). But many meat lovers feel that meat has  gotten less flavorful in recent decades. Life intensifies flavor, and modern meat  animals are living less and less.  Changing Tastes for Fat: The Modern Style   In the early 1960s, American  consumers began to abandon well marbled beef and pork for less fatty cuts and  for lean poultry. Since marbling develops only after the animals’ rapid muscle  growth slows, the meat industry was happy to minimize fattening and improve its  production efficiency. Consumer and producer preferences for lean beef led the  USDA to reduce its marbling requirements for the top grades in 1965 and 1975.  The modern style of meat, then, combines elements of the traditional styles: young  like the city meats, lean like the country meats, and therefore both mild and easily  dried out during cooking. Cooks now face the challenge of adapting hearty  country traditions to these finicky ingredients.  Quality Production: A French Example   There have been small but significant  exceptions to this general trend toward producing meat as cheaply as possible. In  the   1960s,   the   French   poultry   industry   found   that   many   consumers   were  dissatisfied with the standard chicken’s bland flavor and tendency to shrink and fall  off the bone when cooked. Some producers then developed a production scheme  guided by considerations of quality as well as efficiency. The result was the popular  label rouge,   or “red label,” which identifies chickens that have been produced  according to specific standards: they are slow-growing varieties, fed primarily on  grain rather than artificially concentrated feeds, raised in flocks of moderate size  and with access to the outdoors, and slaughtered at 80 or more days of age rather  than 40 to 50. Red-label chickens are leaner and more muscular than their  standard industrial equivalent, lose a third less of their moisture during cooking,
are firmer in texture, and have a more pronounced flavor. Similar quality-based  meat production schemes exist today in a number of countries.  USDA Beef Grades: The Triumph of Fat over Lean  As economist V. James Rhodes recounts, the USDA grading system for beef  did not arise from an objective government analysis of meat quality. Instead,  it was conceived and pushed during an agricultural recession in the early  1920s by cattlemen in the Midwest and East, who wanted to boost demand  for their purebred, fat, corn-fed animals at the expense of lean dairy and  “scrub” cattle. The chief propagandist was Alvin H. Sanders, editor of the  Breeder’s Gazette,   who colorfully denigrated the slow cooking of economical  cuts as “the same old continental European story of how to make a banquet  out of a few bones and a dash of ‘cat-meat.’”  Sanders and his colleagues set out to convince the country that “the muscular  tissues of animals are made tender and fully flavored only by the presence of  plenty of fat.” In the summer of 1926, a well-placed breeder and New York  financier named Oakleigh Thorne personally tutored the Secretary of  Agriculture, who soon offered to begin free quality grading — based on the  amount of visible fat marbling — at all packing houses subject to federal  health supervision. U.S. “Prime” beef was born in 1927. A few years later,  government-funded studies found that heavy marbling does   not   guarantee  either tender or flavorful beef. But the prestige of heavily marbled Prime beef  persisted, and the United States became one of only three countries — the  others being Japan and Korea — to make fat content a major criterion for  meat quality.  So economic forces have conspired to make mild, tender meat the modern norm,  but small producers of more mature, flavorful meats, sometimes from rare  “heirloom” breeds, are finding their own profitable market among consumers  willing to pay a premium for quality.
Meat Animals and Their Characteristics  Each of the animals that we raise for food has its own biological nature, and its own  history of being shaped by humans to meet their changing needs and tastes. This  section sketches the distinctive qualities of our more common meats, and the  main styles in which they’re now produced.  Domestic Meat Animals  Cattle   Cattle are descendents of the wild ox or aurochs,   Bos primigenius,   which  browsed and grazed in forests and plains all across temperate Eurasia. Cattle are  our largest meat animals and take the longest to reach adulthood, about two  years, so their meat is relatively dark and flavorful. Breeders began to develop  specialized meat animals in the 18th century. Britain produced the compact, fat-  carcassed English Hereford and Shorthorn and Scots Angus, while continental  meat breeds remained closer to the rangy, lean draft type; these include the  French Charolais and Limousin, and the Italian Chianina, which is probably the  largest breed in the world (4,000-pound bulls, double the size of the English  breeds).  American Beef   The United States developed a uniform national style when federal  grading standards for beef were introduced in 1927 (see box, p. 136), with the  highest “Prime” grade reserved for young, fine-textured meat with abundant  marbling. Purebred Angus and Hereford beef were the model for three decades.  The shift in consumer preference to lower-fat meat brought revisions of the USDA  grades to allow leaner meat to qualify for the Prime and Choice grades (see box  below). Nowadays, U.S. beef comes mainly from steers (males castrated as calves)  and heifers (females that have never calved) between 15 and 24 months old, and  fed on grain for the last four to eight months. Recent years have brought a new  interest in beef from cattle raised exclusively on grass, which is leaner and stronger  in flavor (p. 134) than mainstream beef.  U.S. Beef Quality and Grades Today  Despite the prestige of Prime beef, the current consensus among meat
scientists is that fat marbling accounts for no more than a third of the  variation in the overall tenderness, juiciness, and flavor of cooked beef. The  other important factors include breed, exercise and feed, animal age,  conditions during slaughter, extent of post-slaughter aging (p. 143), and  storage conditions before sale. Most of these are impossible for the consumer  to evaluate, though there is a movement toward store and producer “brands”  that may provide greater information about and consistency of production.  Potentially more flavorful beef from older animals can be recognized by its  darker color and coarser muscle fibers.  Most graded supermarket beef today is graded “Choice,” with 4–10% fat, or  “Select,” with 2–4% fat. Prime beef is now around 10–13% fat. Ground beef,  which may be all lean meat or a mixture of lean and fat, ranges from 5 to 30%  fat content.  European Beef   Other beef-loving countries raise their cattle differently and have  produced distinctive beefs. Italy prefers young meat from animals slaughtered at  16–18 months. Until the advent of BSE, much French and British beef came from  dairy   stock   several   years   old.   According   to   a   standard   French   handbook,  Technologie Culinaire   (1995), the meat of an animal less than two years old is  “completely insipid,” while meat “at the summit of quality” comes from a steer three  to four years old. But because the risk of an animal having BSE rises as it grows  older, a number of countries now require that meat cattle be slaughtered at less  than three years of age. In 2004, most French and British beef came from animals  no older than 30 months.  Japanese Beef   Japan prizes its   shimofuri,   or highly marbled beef, of which the best  known comes from the Kobe region. Steers of the native Wagyu draft breed are  slaughtered at 24–30 months. High-quality heifers (and some steers) are identified  and then fattened for a further year or more on grain. (Currently Japan tests all  meat cattle for BSE.) This process produces beef that is mature, flavorful, tender,  and very rich, with as much as 40% marbling fat. The best cuts are usually sliced  very thin, in 1.5–2 mm sheets, and simmered in broth for a few seconds in the one-  pot dishes called   sukiyaki   and   shabu shabu.  Veal   Veal is the meat of young male offspring of dairy cows. Veal has traditionally
been valued for being as different as possible from beef: pale, delicate in flavor,  with a softer fat, and succulently tender thanks to its soluble collagen, which  readily dissolves into gelatin when cooked. Calf flesh becomes more like beef with  every day of ordinary life, so most veal calves aren’t allowed an ordinary life: they’re  confined so that exercise won’t darken, flavor, and toughen their muscles, and fed  a low-iron diet with no grass to minimize the production of myoglobin pigment  and prevent rumen development (p. 13), which would saturate and thus harden  the fat. In the United States, veal generally comes from confined animals fed a soy  or milk formula and slaughtered between 5 and 16 weeks old, when they weigh  150 to 500 lb/70–230 kg. “Bob” or “drop” veal comes from unconfined, milk-fed  animals three weeks old or less. “Free-range” and “grain-fed” veal have become  increasingly common as more humane alternatives, but are more like beef in the  color and flavor of their meat.  Sheep   Along with goats, sheep were probably the first animals to be domesticated  after the dog, thanks to their small size, around a tenth that of cattle, and their  herding instinct. Most European breeds of sheep are specialized for milk or wool;  there are relatively few specialized meat breeds.  Lamb and Mutton   Lamb and sheep meat is finer grained and more tender than  beef,   but   well   endowed   with   red   myoglobin   and   with   flavor,   including   a  characteristic odor (p. 134) that becomes more pronounced with age. Pasture-  feeding, particularly on alfalfa and clover, increases the levels of a compound  called skatole, which also contributes a barnyardy element to pork flavor, while  lambs finished on grain for a month before slaughter are milder. In the United  States, lambs are sold in a range of ages and weights, from 1 to 12 months and 20–  100 lb/9–45 kg, under a variety of names, including “milk” and “hothouse” lamb for  younger animals, “spring” and “Easter” lamb for the rest (though production is no  longer truly seasonal). New Zealand lamb is pasture-fed but slaughtered at four  months, younger than most American lamb, and remains mild. In France, older  lambs ( mouton ) and young female sheep ( brebis ) are aged for a week or more after  slaughter, and develop an especially rich flavor.  Pigs   Pigs are descendents of the Eurasian wild boar,   Sus scrofa.   If beef has been the  most esteemed of meats in Europe and the Americas, pork has fed far more  people, both there and in the rest of the world: in China the word for “pork” is also  the generic word for “meat.” The pig has the virtues of being a relatively small,  voracious omnivore that grows rapidly and bears large litters. Its indiscriminate
appetite means that it can turn otherwise useless scraps into meat, but that meat  can harbor and transmit parasites from infected animals and their remains (see p.  126 on trichinosis). Perhaps in part for this reason, and because pigs are difficult to  herd and will devour field crops, pork eating has been forbidden among various  peoples, notably Middle Eastern Jews and Muslims.  There are several specialized styles of pigs, including lard breeds, bacon breeds,  and meat breeds, some large-boned and massive, some (Iberian and Basque ham  pigs) relatively lean, slow-growing, small and dark-fleshed, much like their wild  south-Europe ancestors. Today most of the specialized breeds have been displaced  by the fast-growing descendents of a few European bacon and meat breeds.  Pork   Like modern beef, modern pork comes from much younger and leaner  animals than was true a century ago. Pigs are typically slaughtered at six months  and 220 lb/100 kg, just as they reach sexual maturity, when the connective tissue is  still relatively soluble and the meat tender. Individual cuts of American and  European pork generally contain half to a fifth of the fat they did in 1980. Pork is a  pale meat because the pig uses its muscles more intermittently than do cattle and  sheep, and therefore has a lower proportion of red muscle fibers (around 15%).  Some small Chinese and European breeds have darker and significantly more  flavorful flesh.  Domestic Meat Birds  Chickens   Chickens are descendents of the aggressive, pugnacious red jungle fowl  of northern India and southern China.   Gallus gallus   is a member of the pheasant  family or Phasianidae, a large, originally Eurasian group of birds that tend to  colonize open forest or the edge between field and wood. Chickens seem to have  been domesticated in the vicinity of Thailand before 7500   BCE , and arrived in the  Mediterranean around 500   BCE . In the West, they were largely unpampered  farmyard scavengers until the 19th-century importation of large Chinese birds  created a veritable chicken-breeding craze in Europe and North America. Mass  production began in the 20th century, when much of the genetic diversity in meat  chickens evaporated in favor of a fast-growing cross between the broad-breasted  Cornish (developed in Britain from Asian fighting stock) and the U.S. White  Plymouth Rock.  Chicken Styles   The modern chicken is a product of the drive to breed fast-growing
animals and raise them as rapidly and on as little feed as possible. It’s an impressive  feat of agricultural engineering to produce a 4-pound bird on 8 pounds of feed in  six weeks! Because such a bird grows very fast and lives very little, its meat is fairly  bland, and that of the younger “game hen” or “poussin” even more so.  Largely in reaction to the image of industrial chicken, so-called “free range”  chickens are now sold in the United States, but the term only means that the birds  have access to an outdoor pen. “Roasting” chickens and capons (castrated males)  are raised to double or more the age of the standard broiler, are heavier, and so  have given their leg muscles more exercise; the capon may also be more succulent  thanks to the infiltration of marbling fat.  Turkeys   Turkeys are also members of the sedentary pheasant family.   Meleagris  gallopavo   descended from ancestors that once ranged through North America and  Asia. The modern colossal turkey dates from 1927–1930, when a breeder in British  Columbia developed a 40 lb/18 kg bird with oversized flight and thigh muscles,  and breeders in the U.S. northwest used his stock to perfect the Broad-Breasted  Bronze. The little-used breast muscle is tender, mild, and lean; the leg muscles that  support the breast are well-exercised, dark, and flavorful.  Today, industrial facilities produce 14–20 lb/6–9 kg birds year-round in 12–18  weeks; some small American farms extend the period to 24 weeks, while the  name-controlled French Bresse turkey is raised for 32 weeks or more, confined and  fattened for the last several weeks on corn and milk.  Food Words:   Turkey  Ornithological and geographical confusion appear to be responsible for the  common names of this bird, which came late to Europe. The turkey was first seen by  the Spanish in Mexico around 1518, and they named it with variants on the word  pavo,   “pea fowl.” In most other European languages its early names referred to India:  French   dinde, dindon   ( d’Inde,   “of India”), German   Kalikutische Hahn   (“hen of Calicut,”  an Indian port), Italian   pollo d’India   (“fowl of India”). The turkey was indeed in India  by 1615, so it could well have been introduced to much of Europe via Asia. The  English connection with Turkey goes back quite early, to around 1540, and is more  obscure. It may reflect a vague impression that the bird came from some outpost of
the exotic Ottoman Empire, which originated in and was identified with Turkey.  Some Characteristics of Meat Birds  In general, older and larger birds and those with more red fibers have a more  pronounced flavor.  Bird  Age,  weeks   Weight, lb/kg  Red Fibers in Breast  Muscle, %  Chickens   10  Industrial broiler, fryer   6–8   1.5–3.5/0.7–1.6  Roaster   12–20   3.5–5/1.6–2.3  French   label rouge   11.5   2–3.5/1–1.6  French   appellation contrôlée   16   2–3.5/1–1.6  Game hen   5–6   1–2/0.5–1  Capon   <32   5–8/2.3–3.6  Stewing fowl   >40   3.5–6/1.6–2.7  Turkeys   8–30/3.6–14   10  Industrial   12–18  French   fermière,   U.S.  premium brands  24  French   appellation contrôlée   32  Duck   6–16   3.5–7/1.6–3.2   80  Goose   24–28   7–20/3.2–9   85  Quail (wild)   6–10   0.25–0.33/0.1–  0.15  75  Squab   4–5   0.75–1.3/0.3–  0.6  85  Guinea hen   10–15   2–3.5/1–1.6   25  Pheasant   13–24   2–3/1–1.4   35
Ducks and Squab   Ducks and squab are notable for having dark, flavorful breast  meat, abundantly endowed with myoglobin-rich red muscle fibers, thanks to their  ability to fly hundreds of miles in a day with few stops. The most common breeds  of duck in China, much of Europe, and the United States are descendents of the  wild green-headed mallard,   Anas platyrhynchos,   an aquatic migratory bird that  puts on as much as a third of its carcass weight in fat for fuel and under-skin  insulation. Ducks are eaten at two ages: in the egg as 15–20-day embryos (the  Philippine boiled delicacy   balut ), and at 6 to 16 weeks. The Muscovy duck is an  entirely different bird:   Cairina moschata,   the greater wood duck, which is native to  the west coast of Central and northern South America, differs in three important  ways from mallard varieties: it lays down about a third less body fat, grows  significantly larger, and has a more pronounced flavor.  Squab, dove, and pigeon are various names for the European rock dove,   Columba  livia,   a species that includes the common city pigeon; “squab” means a bird young  enough that it has never flown. Its flying muscles weigh five times as much as its  leg muscles. Today, domestic squab are raised for four weeks and slaughtered at  about 1 lb/450 g, just before they’re mature enough to fly.  Game Animals and Birds  Wild animals — sometimes called   game   or   venison   — have always been especially  prized in the autumn, when they fatten themselves for the coming winter. While  the autumn game season is still celebrated in many European restaurants with wild  duck, hare, pheasant, partridge, deer, and boar, in the United States wild meats are  banned from commerce (only inspected meat can be sold legally, and hunted  meat is not inspected). Most “game” meats available to the U.S. consumer these  days come from animals raised on farms and ranches. They’re perhaps better  described as “semi-domestic” meats. Some of these animals have been raised in  captivity   since   Roman   times,   but   haven’t   been   as   intensively   bred   as   the  domesticated animals, and so are still much like their wild counterparts.  Today Americans are buying more venison (various species of deer and antelope),  buffalo, and other game meats thanks to their distinctive flavors and leanness. The  very low fat content of game meat causes it to conduct heat and cook faster than  standard meats, and to dry out more easily. Cooks often shield it from direct oven  heat by “barding” it with a sheet of fat or fatty bacon, and baste it during cooking,
which cools the meat surface by evaporation and slows the movement of heat into  the meat (p. 158).  Gaminess   True wild game has the appeal of rich, variable flavor, thanks to its  mature age, free exercise, and mixed diet. Carried to excess, this interesting wild  flavor becomes “gamy.” In the time of Brillat-Savarin, game was typically allowed to  hang for days or weeks until it began to rot. This treatment was called   mortification  or   faisandage   (after the pheasant,   faisan ), and had two purposes: it tenderized the  meat, and further heightened its “wild” flavor. Gamy game is no longer the style.  Modern farmed animals are often relatively sedentary, eat a uniform diet, and are  slaughtered before they reach sexual maturity, so they’re usually milder in flavor  and more tender than their wild counterparts. Since distinctive meat flavors reside  in the fat, they can be minimized by careful trimming.  Food Words:   Game   and   Venison  The word   game   is Germanic in origin. Its original meaning in Old English was  “amusement,”   “sport,” and after some centuries was applied to hunted animals  by people wealthy enough to consider hunting as entertainment. ( Hunt  originally meant “to seize.”) The term   venison   comes from the Latin verb  venari,   “to hunt,” but ultimately from an Indo-European root meaning “to  desire, to strive for,” which also gave us the words   win, wish, venerate, Venus,  and   venom   (originally a love potion). It once meant all hunted animals, but  now refers mainly to deer and antelope, both ruminants, like cattle and sheep,  that can eat weeds and brush and thrive on poorer land than their  domesticated relatives.  The Transformation of Muscle into Meat  The first step in meat production is to raise a healthy animal. The second step is to  transform the living animal into useful portions of its flesh. The ways in which this  transformation occurs affect the quality of the meat, and can explain why the same  cut of meat from the same store can be moist and tender one week and dry and  tough the next. So it’s useful to know what goes on in the slaughterhouse and
packing plant.  Slaughter  The Importance of Avoiding Stress   By a fortunate coincidence, the methods of  slaughter that result in good-quality meat are also the most humane. It has been  recognized for centuries that stress just before an animal’s death — whether  physical work, hunger, duress in transport, fighting, or simple fear — has an  adverse effect on meat quality. When an animal is killed, its muscle cells continue  to live for some time and consume their energy supply (glycogen, an animal  version of starch). In the process they accumulate lactic acid, which reduces  enzyme activity, slows microbial spoilage, and causes some fluid loss, which makes  the meat seem moist. Stress depletes the muscles of their energy supply before  slaughter, so that after slaughter they accumulate less lactic acid and produce  readily spoiled “dark, firm, dry” or “dark-cutting” meat, a condition first described in  the 18th century. So it pays to treat animals well. In November 1979, the   New York  Times   reported that a Finnish slaughterhouse had evicted a group of young  musicians from a nearby building because their practice sessions were resulting in  dark-cutting meat.  Procedures   Meat animals are generally slaughtered as untraumatically as possible.  Each animal is stunned, usually with a blow or electrical discharge to the head, and  then is hung up by the legs. One or two of the major blood vessels in the neck are  cut, and the animal bleeds to death while unconscious. As much blood as possible  (about half) is removed to decrease the risk of spoilage. (Rarely, as in the French  Rouen duck, blood is retained in the animal to deepen the meat’s flavor and color.)  After bleeding, cattle and lamb heads are removed, the hides stripped off, the  carcasses cut open, and the inner organs removed. Pig carcasses remain intact  until they have been scalded, scraped and singed to remove bristles; the head and  innards are then removed, but the skin is left in place.  Chickens, turkeys, and other fowl must be plucked. The slaughtered birds are  usually immersed in a bath of hot water to loosen the feathers, plucked by  machine, and cooled in a cold-water bath or cold-air blast. Prolonged water-  chilling can add a significant amount of water to the carcass: U.S. regulations allow  5–12% of chicken weight to be absorbed water, or several ounces in a 4-pound  bird. By contrast, air-chilling, which is standard in much of Europe and Scandinavia,
actually removes water, so that the flesh becomes more concentrated and the skin  will brown more readily.  Kosher and halal meats are processed according to Jewish and Muslim religious  laws respectively, which among other things require a brief period of salting. These  practices don’t allow meat birds to be scalded before plucking, so their skin is  often torn. The plucked carcasses are then salted for 30–60 minutes and briefly  rinsed in cold water; like air-chilled birds, they absorb little if any extraneous  moisture. Salting makes meat fats more prone to oxidation and the development  of off flavors, so kosher and halal meats don’t keep as long as conventionally  processed meats.  Rigor Mortis  The Importance of Timing, Posture, and Temperature   For a brief period after the  animal’s death its muscles are relaxed, and if immediately cut and cooked will  make especially tender meat. Soon, however, the muscles clench in the condition  called   rigor mortis   (“stiffness of death”). If cooked in this state, they make very  tough meat. Rigor sets in (after about 2.5 hours in the steer, 1 hour or less in lamb,  pork, and chicken) when the muscle fibers run out of energy, their control systems  fail and trigger a contracting movement of the protein filaments, and the filaments  lock in place. Carcasses are hung up in such a way that most of their muscles are  stretched by gravity, so that the protein filaments can’t contract and overlap very  much; otherwise the filaments bunch up and bond very tightly and the meat  becomes exceptionally tough. Eventually, protein-digesting enzymes within the  muscle fibers begin to eat away the framework that holds the actin and myosin  filaments in place. The filaments are still locked together, and the muscles cannot  be stretched, but the overall muscle structure weakens, and the meat texture  softens. This is the beginning of the aging process. It becomes noticeable after  about a day in beef, after several hours in pork and chicken.  The   inevitable   toughening   during   rigor   mortis   can   be   worsened   by   poor  temperature control, and may be the source of excessive toughness in retail meats.  Aging  Like cheese and wine, meat benefits from a certain period of aging, or slow  chemical change, during which it gets progressively more flavorful. Meat also
becomes more tender. In the 19th century, beef and mutton joints would be kept  at room temperature for days or weeks, until the outside was literally rotten. The  French called this   mortification,   and the great chef Antonin Carême said that it  should proceed “as far as possible.”   The modern taste is for somewhat less mortified  flesh! In fact most meat in the United States is aged only incidentally, during the  few days it takes to be shipped from packing plant to market. This is enough for  chicken, which benefits from a day or two of aging, and for pork and lamb, which  benefit from a week. (The unsaturated fats of pork and poultry go rancid relatively  quickly.) But the flavor and texture of beef keeps improving for up to a month,  especially when whole, unwrapped sides are   dry-aged   at 34–38ºF/1–3ºC and at a  relative humidity of 70–80%. The cool temperature limits the growth of microbes,  while the moderate humidity causes the meat to lose moisture gradually, and thus  become denser and more concentrated.  Muscle Enzymes Generate Flavor…   The aging of meat is mainly the work of the  muscle enzymes. Once the animal is slaughtered and the control systems in its  cells   stop   functioning,   the   enzymes   begin   attacking   other   cell   molecules  indiscriminately,   turning   large   flavorless   molecules   into   smaller,   flavorful  fragments. They break proteins into savory amino acids; glycogen into sweet  glucose; the energy currency ATP into savory IMP (inosine monophosphate); fats  and fat-like membrane molecules into aromatic fatty acids. All of these breakdown  products contribute to the intensely meaty, nutty flavor of aged meat. During  cooking, the same products also react with each other to form new molecules that  enrich the aroma further.  …And Diminish Toughness   Uncontrolled enzyme activity also tenderizes meat.  Enzymes called   calpains   mainly weaken the supporting proteins that hold the  contracting filaments in place. Others called   cathepsins   break apart a variety of  proteins, including the contracting filaments and the supporting molecules. The  cathepsins also weaken the collagen in connective tissue, by breaking some of the  strong cross-links between mature collagen fibers. This has two important effects:  it causes more collagen to dissolve into gelatin during cooking, thus making the  meat more tender and succulent; and it reduces the squeezing pressure that the  connective tissue exerts during heating (p. 150), which means that the meat loses  less moisture during cooking.  Enzyme activity depends on temperature. The calpains begin to denature and lose  activity around 105ºF/40ºC, the cathepsins around 122ºF/50ºC. But below this
critical range, the higher the temperature, the faster the enzymes work. Some  accelerated “aging” can take place during cooking. If meat is quickly seared or  blanched in boiling water to eliminate microbes on its surface, and then heated up  slowly during the cooking — for example, by braising or roasting in a slow oven —  then the aging enzymes within the meat can be very active for several hours  before they denature. Large 50 lb/23 kg slow-roasted “steamship” rounds of beef  spend 10 hours or more rising to 120–130ºF/50–55ºC, and come out more tender  than small portions of the same cut cooked quickly.  Aging Meat in Plastic and in the Kitchen   Despite the contribution that aging can  make to meat quality, the modern meat industry generally avoids it, since it means  tying up its assets in cold storage and losing about 20% of the meat’s original  weight to evaporation and laborious trimming of the dried, rancid, sometimes  moldy surface. Most meat is now butchered into retail cuts at the packing plant  shortly after slaughter, wrapped in plastic, and shipped to market immediately,  with an average of 4 to 10 days between slaughter and sale. Such meat is  sometimes   wet-aged,   or kept in its plastic wrap for some days or weeks, where it’s  shielded from oxygen and retains moisture while its enzymes work. Wet-aged  meat can develop some of the flavor and tenderness of dry-aged meat, but not the  same concentration of flavor.  Cooks can age meat in the kitchen. Simply buying meat several days before it’s  needed will mean some informal aging in the refrigerator, where it can be kept  tightly wrapped, or uncovered to allow some evaporation and concentration.  (Loose or no wrapping may cause dry spots, the absorption of undesirable odors,  and the necessity of some trimming; this works best with large roasts, not steaks  and chops.) And as we’ve seen, slow cooking gives the aging enzymes a chance to  do in a few hours what would otherwise take weeks.  Cutting and Packaging  In the traditional butchering practice that prevailed until the late 20th century but  is now rare, animal carcasses are divided at the slaughterhouse into large pieces —  halves or quarters — which are then delivered to retail butchers, who break them  down into roasts, steaks, chops, and the other standard cuts. The meat might not  be wrapped at all until sale, and then only loosely in “butcher’s paper.” Such meat is  continuously exposed to the air, so it tends to be fully oxygenated and red, and it
slowly dries out, which concentrates its flavor at the same time that it leaves some  surface areas discolored and off-flavored and in need of trimming.  The modern tendency in butchering is to break meat down into the retail cuts at  the packing house, vacuum-wrap them in plastic precisely to avoid exposure to the  air, and deliver these prepackaged cuts to the supermarket. Vacuum-packed meat  has the economic advantage of assembly-line efficiency, and keeps for weeks (as  much as 12 for beef, 6 to 8 for pork and lamb) without any weight loss due to  drying or trimming. Once repackaged, meat has a display-case life of a few days.  Carefully handled, well packaged meat will be firm to the touch, moist and even-  colored in appearance, and mild and fresh in smell.  Meat Spoilage and Storage  Fresh meat is an unstable food. Once a living muscle has been transformed into a  piece of meat it begins to change, both chemically and biologically. The changes  that we associate with aging — the generation of flavor and tenderness by  enzymes throughout the meat — are desirable. But the changes that take place at  the meat surface are generally undesirable. Oxygen in the air and energetic rays of  light generate off-flavors and dull color. And meat is a nourishing food for  microbes as well as for humans. Given the chance, bacteria will feast on meat  surfaces and multiply. The result is both unappetizing and unsafe, since some  microbial digesters of dead flesh can also poison or invade the living.  Meat Spoilage  Fat Oxidation and Rancidity   The most important chemical damage suffered by  meats is the breakdown of their fats by both oxygen and light into small, odorous  fragments that define the smell of   rancidity.   Rancid fat won’t necessarily make us  sick, but it’s unpleasant, so its development limits how long we can age and store  meat. Unsaturated fats are most susceptible to rancidity, which means that fish,  poultry, and game birds go bad most quickly. Beef has the most saturated and  stable of all meat fats, and keeps the longest.  Fat oxidation in meats can’t be prevented, but it can be delayed by careful  handling. Wrap raw meat tightly in oxygen-impermeable plastic wrap (saran, or  polyvinylidene chloride; polyethylene is permeable), overwrap it with foil or paper
to keep it in the dark, store it in the coldest corner of the refrigerator or freezer, and  use it as soon as possible. When cooking with ground meat, grind the meat fresh,  just before cooking, since dividing the meat into many small pieces exposes a very  large surface area to the air. The development of rancidity in cooked meats can be  delayed by minimizing the use of salt, which encourages fat oxidation, and by  using ingredients with antioxidant activity: for example the Mediterranean herbs,  especially rosemary (p. 395). Browning the meat surface in a hot pan also  generates antioxidant molecules that can delay fat oxidation.  Spoilage by Bacteria and Molds   The intact muscles of healthy livestock are  generally free of microbes. The bacteria and molds that spoil meat are introduced  during processing, usually from the animal’s hide or the packing-plant machinery.  Poultry and fish are especially prone to spoilage because they’re sold with their  skin intact, and many bacteria persist despite washing. Most of these are harmless  but unpleasant. Bacteria and molds break down cells at the meat surface and  digest proteins and amino acids into molecules that smell fishy, skunky, and like  rotten eggs. Spoiled meat smells more disgusting than other rotten foods exactly  because it contains the proteins that generate these stinky compounds.  Refrigeration  In the developed world, the most common domestic method for preserving meat  is simply to keep it cool. Refrigeration has two great advantages: it requires little or  no preparation time, and it leaves the meat relatively unchanged from its fresh  state. Cooling meat extends its useful life because both bacteria and meat  enzymes become less active as the temperature drops. Even so, spoilage does  continue. Meats keep best at temperatures approaching or below the freezing  point, 32ºF/0ºC.  Freezing   Freezing greatly extends the storage life of meat and other foods  because it halts all biological processes. Life requires liquid water, and freezing  immobilizes the food’s liquid water in solid crystals of ice. Well-frozen meat will  keep for millennia, as has been demonstrated by the discovery of mammoth flesh  frozen 15,000 years ago in the ice of northern Siberia. It’s best to keep meat as cold  as possible. The usual recommendation for home freezers is 0ºF/–18ºC (many  operate at 10–15ºF/–12 to –9ºC).  Freezing will preserve meat indefinitely from biological decay. However, it’s a
drastic physical treatment that inevitably causes damage to the muscle tissue, and  therefore diminishes meat quality in several ways.  Cell Damage and Fluid Loss   As raw meat freezes, the growing crystals protrude  into the soft cell membranes and puncture them. When the meat is thawed, the ice  crystals melt and unplug the holes they’ve made in the muscle cells, and the tissue  as a whole readily leaks a fluid rich in salts, vitamins, proteins, and pigments. Then  when the meat is cooked, it loses more fluid than usual (p. 150), and more readily  ends up dry, dense, and tough. Cooked meat suffers less from freezing because its  tissue has already been damaged and lost fluid when it was heated.  Cell damage and fluid loss are minimized by freezing the meat as rapidly as  possible and keeping it as cold as possible. The faster the meat moisture freezes,  the smaller the crystals that it forms, and the less they protrude into the cell  membranes; and the colder the meat is kept, the less enlargement of existing  crystals will occur. Freezing can be accelerated by setting the freezer at its coldest  temperature, dividing the meat into small pieces, and leaving it unwrapped until  after it has solidified (wrapping acts as insulation and can double the freezing  time).  Fat Oxidation and Rancidity   In addition to inflicting physical damage, freezing  causes chemical changes that limit the storage life of frozen meats. When ice  crystals form and remove liquid water from the muscle fluids, the increasing  concentration of salts and trace metals promotes the oxidation of unsaturated fats,  and rancid flavors accumulate. This inexorable process means that quality declines  noticeably for fresh fish and poultry after only a few months in the freezer, for pork  after about six months, for lamb and veal after about nine months, and for beef  after about a year. The flavors of ground meats, cured meats, and cooked meats  deteriorate even faster.  Freezer Burn   A last side effect of freezing is   freezer burn,   that familiar brownish-  white discoloration of the meat surface that develops after some weeks or months  of storage. This is caused by water “sublimation” — the equivalent of evaporation  at below-freezing temperatures — from ice crystals at the meat surface into the  dry freezer air. The departure of the water leaves tiny cavities in the meat surface  which scatter light and so appear white. The meat surface is now in effect a thin  layer of freeze-dried meat where oxidation of fat and pigment is accelerated, so  texture, flavor, and color all suffer.
Freezer burn can be minimized by covering the meat as tightly as possible with  water-impermeable plastic wrap.  Thawing Meats   Frozen meats are usually thawed before cooking. The simplest  method — leaving the meat on the kitchen counter — is neither safe nor efficient.  The surface can rise to microbe-friendly temperatures long before the interior  thaws, and air transfers heat to the meat very slowly, at about one-twentieth the  rate that water does. A much faster and safer method is to immerse the wrapped  meat in a bath of ice water, which keeps the surface safely cold, but still transfers  heat into the meat efficiently. If the piece of meat is too large for a water bath, or  isn’t needed right away, then it’s also safe to thaw it in the refrigerator. But cold air  is an especially inefficient purveyor of warmth, so it can take days for a large roast  to thaw.  Cooking Unthawed Meats   Frozen meats can be cooked without thawing them  first, particularly with relatively slow methods such as oven roasting, which give  the heat time to penetrate to the center without drastically overcooking the outer  portions of the meat. Cooking times are generally 30–50% longer than for fresh  cuts.  Irradiation  Because ionizing radiation (p. 782) damages delicate biological machinery like  DNA and proteins, it kills spoilage and disease microbes in food, thus extending its  shelf life and making it safer to eat. Tests have shown that low doses of radiation  can kill most microbes and more than double the shelf life of carefully wrapped  refrigerated meats. There is, however, a characteristic radiation flavor, described as  metallic, sulfurous, and goaty, which may be barely noticeable or unpleasantly  strong.  Beginning in 1985, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration has approved irradiation  to control a number of pathogens in meat: first trichinosis in pork, then salmonella  in chickens, and   E. coli   in beef. A treatment like irradiation is an especially valuable  form of insurance for the mass production of ground meats, in which a single  infected carcass can contaminate thousands of pounds of meat, and affect  thousands of consumers. But its use remains limited due to consumer wariness.  Decades of testing indicate that irradiated meat is safe to eat. But one other  objection is quite reasonable. If meat has been contaminated with enough fecal
matter to cause infection with   E. coli,   then irradiation will kill the bacteria and leave  the meat edible for three months. However, it will still be adulterated meat. Many  consumers set a higher standard than the absence of living pathogens and  months of shelf life for the food from which they take daily nourishment and  pleasure. People who care about food quality will seek out meat produced locally,  carefully, and recently, and for enjoyment within a few days, when it’s at its best.  Cooking Fresh Meat: The Principles  We cook meat for four basic reasons: to make it safe to eat, easier to chew and to  digest (denatured proteins are more vulnerable to our digestive enzymes), and to  make it more flavorful. The issue of safety is detailed beginning on p. 124. Here I’ll  describe the physical and chemical transformations of meat during cooking, their  effects on flavor and texture, and the challenge of cooking meat well. These  changes are summarized in the box on p. 152.  Heat and Meat Flavor  Raw meat is tasty rather than flavorful. It provides salts, savory amino acids, and a  slight acidity to the tongue, but offers little in the way of aroma. Cooking  intensifies the taste of meat and creates its aroma. Simple physical damage to the  muscle fibers causes them to release more of their fluids and therefore more  stimulating substances for the tongue. This fluid release is at its maximum when  meat is only lightly cooked, or done “rare.” As the temperature increases and the  meat dries out, physical change gives way to chemical change, and to the  development of aroma as cell molecules break apart and recombine with each  other to form new molecules that not only smell meaty, but also fruity and floral,  nutty and grassy (esters, ketones, aldehydes).  Surface Browning at High Temperatures   If fresh meat never gets hotter than the  boiling point of water, then its flavor is largely determined by the breakdown  products of proteins and fats. However, roasted, broiled, and fried meats develop a  crust that is much more intensely flavored, because the meat surface dries out and  gets hot enough to trigger the Maillard or browning reactions (p. 778). Meat  aromas generated in the browning reactions are generally small rings of carbon  atoms with additions of nitrogen, oxygen, and sulfur. Many of these have a generic  “roasted” character, but some are grassy, floral, oniony or spicy, and earthy. Several
hundred aromatic compounds have been found in roasted meats!  Heat and Meat Color  The appearance of meat changes in two different ways during cooking. Initially it’s  somewhat translucent because its cells are filled with a relatively loose meshwork  of proteins suspended in water. When heated to about 120ºF/50ºC, it develops a  white opacity as heat-sensitive myosin denatures and coagulates into clumps large  enough to scatter light. This change causes red meat color to lighten from red to  pink,   long   before   the   red   pigments   themselves   are   affected. Then,   around  140ºF/60ºC, red myoglobin begins to denature into a tan-colored version called  hemichrome. As this change proceeds, meat color shifts from pink to brown-gray.  The denaturation of myoglobin parallels the denaturation of fiber proteins, and  this makes it possible to judge the doneness of fresh meat by color. Little-cooked  meat and its juices are red, moderately cooked meat and its juices are pink,  thoroughly cooked meat is brown-gray and its juices clear. (Intact red myoglobin  can escape in the meat juices; denatured brown myoglobin has bonded to other  coagulated proteins in the cells and stays there.) However, there are a number of  oddities about myoglobin that can lead to misleading redness or pinkness even in  well-cooked meat (see box). And it’s also possible for undercooked meat to look  brown and well-done, if its myoglobin has already been denatured by prolonged  exposure to light or to freezing temperatures. If it’s essential that meat be cooked  to microbe-destroying temperatures, then the cook should use an accurate  thermometer to confirm that it has reached a minimum of 160ºF/70ºC. Meat color  can be misleading.  The pigments in cooked and cured meats. Left to right: In raw meat, the oxygen-  carrying myoglobin is red; in cooked meat, the oxidized, denatured form of myoglobin  is brown; in meats cured with nitrite, including corned beef and ham, the myoglobin
assumes a stable pink form (NO is nitric oxide, a product of nitrite); and in uncured  meats cooked in a charcoal grill or gas oven, traces of carbon monoxide (CO)  accumulate and produce another stable pink form.  Persistent Colors in Cooked Meats  Thoroughly cooked meat is usually a dull, brownish-gray in appearance due  to the denaturing of its myoglobin and cytochrome pigments. But two  cooking methods can leave well-done meat attractively red or pink.  •   Barbecued meat, stew meat, a pot roast, or a confit can be surprisingly  pink or red inside — if it was heated very gradually and gently.  Myoglobin and cytochromes can survive somewhat higher  temperatures than the other muscle proteins. When meat is heated  quickly, its temperature rises quickly, and some of the muscle proteins  are still unfolding and denaturing when the pigments begin to do the  same. The other proteins are therefore able to react with the pigments  and turn them brown. But when meat is heated slowly, so that it takes  an hour or two to reach the denaturing temperature for myoglobin and  cytochromes, the other proteins finish denaturing first, and react with  each other. By the time that the pigments become vulnerable, there are  few other proteins left to react with them, so they stay intact and the  meat stays red. The preliminary salting for making a confit (p. 177)  greatly accentuates this effect in duck meat.  •   Meats cooked over wood, charcoal, or gas flames — barbecued pork or  beef, for example, or even poultry cooked in a gas oven — often  develop “pink ring,” which reaches from the surface to a depth of 8–10  mm. This is caused by nitrogen dioxide (NO 2 ) gas, which is generated in  trace amounts (parts per million) by the burning of these organic fuels.  It appears that NO 2   dissolves at the meat surface to form nitrous acid  (HNO 2 ), which diffuses into the muscle tissue and is converted to nitric  oxide (NO). NO in turn reacts with myoglobin to form a stable pink  molecule, like the molecule found in nitrite-cured meats (p. 174).
Heat and Meat Texture  The texture of a food is created by its physical structure: the way it feels to the  touch, the balance of solid and liquid components, and the ease or difficulty with  which   our   teeth   break   it   down   into   manageable   pieces.   The   key   textural  components in meat are its moisture, around 75% of its weight, and the fiber  proteins and connective tissue that either contain and confine that moisture, or  release it.  Raw and Cooked Textures   The texture of raw meat is a kind of slick, resistant  mushiness. The meat is chewy yet soft, so that chewing compresses it instead of  cutting through it. And its moisture manifests itself in slipperiness; chewing  doesn’t manage to liberate much juice.  Heat changes meat texture drastically. As it cooks, meat develops a firmness and  resilience that make it easier to chew. It begins to leak fluid, and becomes juicy.  With longer cooking, the juices dry up, and resilience gives way to a dry stiffness.  And when the cooking goes on for hours, the fiber bundles fray away from each  other, and even tough meat begins to fall apart. All of these textures are stages in  the denaturation of the fiber and connective-tissue proteins.  Early Juiciness: Fibers Coagulate   One of the two major contracting filaments, the  protein myosin, begins to coagulate at about 120ºF/50ºC; this lends each cell some  solidity and the meat some firmness. As the myosin molecules bond to each other,  they squeeze out some of the water molecules that had separated them. This  water collects around the solidifying protein core, and is actively squeezed out of  the cell by its thin, elastic sheath of connective tissue. In intact muscles, juices  break through weak spots in the fiber sheaths. In chops and steaks, which are thin  slices of whole muscles, it also escapes out the cut ends of the fibers. Meat served  at this stage, the equivalent of rare, is firm and juicy.  Final Juiciness: Collagen Shrinks   As the meat’s temperature rises to 140ºF/60ºC,  more of the proteins inside its cells coagulate and the cells become more  segregated into a solid core of coagulated protein and a surrounding tube of  liquid: so the meat gets progressively firmer and moister. Then between 140 and  150ºF/60–65ºC, the meat suddenly releases lots of juice, shrinks noticeably, and  becomes chewier. These changes are caused by the denaturing of collagen in the
cells’ connective-tissue sheaths, which shrink and exert new pressure on the fluid-  filled cells inside them. The fluid flows copiously, the piece of meat loses a sixth or  more of its volume, and its protein fibers become more densely packed and so  harder to cut through. Meat served in this temperature range, the equivalent of  medium-rare, is changing from juicy to dry.  How cooking forces moisture from meat. Water molecules are bound up in the protein  fibrils that fill each muscle cell. As the meat is heated, the proteins coagulate, the fibrils  squeeze out some of the water they had contained and shrink. The thin elastic sheet of  connective tissue around each muscle cell then squeezes the unbound water out the  cut ends of the cells.  The Nature of Juiciness  Food scientists who have studied the subjective sensation of juiciness find  that it consists of two phases: the initial impression of moisture as you bite  into the food, and the continued release of moisture as you chew. Juiciness at  first bite comes directly from the meat’s own free water, while continued  juiciness comes from the meat’s fat and flavor, both of which stimulate the  flow of our own saliva. This is probably why well-seared meat is often credited  with greater juiciness despite the fact that searing squeezes more of the  meat’s own juice out. Above all else, searing intensifies flavor by means of the  browning reactions, and intense flavor gets   our   juices flowing.
Falling-Apart Tenderness: Collagen Becomes Gelatin   If the cooking continues,  the meat will get progressively dryer, more compacted, and stiff. Then around  160ºF/70ºC, connective-tissue collagen begins to dissolve into gelatin. With time,  the connective tissue softens to a jelly-like consistency, and the muscle fibers that  it had held tightly together are more easily pushed apart. The fibers are still stiff  and dry, but they no longer form a monolithic mass, so the meat seems more  tender. And the gelatin provides a succulence of its own. This is the delightful  texture of slow-cooked meats, long braises, and stews and barbecues.  The Effects of Heat on Meat Proteins, Color, and Texture  Meat  Tempera-  ture   Doneness  Meat  Qualities  Fiber-  Weakening  Enzymes  Fiber  Proteins  Connective-  Tissue  Collagen  Protein-  Bound  Water  Myoglobin  Pigment  100°F / 40°C   Raw   Soft to touch;  Slick, smooth;  Translucent,  deep red  Active   Beginning to  unfold  Intact   Begins to  escape from  proteins,  accumulate  within cells  Normal  110°F / 45°C   Bleu  120°F / 50°C   Rare, 120-  130°  Becoming  firmer;  Becoming  opaque  Very active   Myosin  begins to  denature,  coagulate  Escape and  accumulatio  n accelerate  130°F / 55°C   Medium  rare, 130-  135°  Resilient to  touch; Less  slick, more  fibrous;  Releases juice  when cut;  Opaque,  lighter red  Denature,  become  inactive,  coagulate  Myosin  coagulated  Collagen  sheaths  begin to  weaken  140°F / 60°C   Medium  135-145°  (USDA  "rare")  Begins to  shrink; Losing  resilience;  Exudes juice;  Red fades to  pink  Other fiber  proteins  denature,  coagulate  Collagen  sheaths  shrink,  squeeze cells  Flows from  cells under  collagen  pressure  Begins to  denature
Meat  Tempera-  ture   Doneness  Meat  Qualities  Fiber-  Weakening  Enzymes  Fiber  Proteins  Connective-  Tissue  Collagen  Protein-  Bound  Water  Myoglobin  Pigment  150°F / 65°C   Medium  well, 145-  155°  (USDA  "medium  rare")  Continues to  shrink; Little  resilience;  Less free juice;  Pink fades to  gray-brown  160°F / 70°C   Well,  155°and  above  (USDA  "medium")  Continues to  shrink; Stiff;  Little free  juice; Gray-  brown  Begins to  dissolve  Flow ceasing   Mostly  denatured,  coagulated  170°F / 75°C   (USDA  "well")  Stiff; Dry;  Gray-brown  180°F / 80°C   Actin  denatures,  coagulates;  cell contents  densely  compacted  190°F / 85°C  200°F / 90°C   Fibers more  easily  separated  from each  other  Dissolving  rapidly  The Challenge of Cooking Meat: The Right Texture  Generally, we like meat to be tender and juicy rather than tough and dry. The ideal  method for cooking meat would therefore minimize moisture loss and compacting  of the meat fibers, while maximizing the conversion of tough connective-tissue  collagen to fluid gelatin. Unfortunately, these two aims contradict each other.  Minimizing fiber firming and moisture loss means cooking meat quickly to no  hotter   than   130–140ºF/55–60ºC.   But   turning   collagen   to   gelatin   requires  prolonged cooking at 160ºF/70ºC and above. So there is no ideal cooking method  for all meats. The method must be tailored to the meat’s toughness. Tender cuts
are best heated rapidly and just to the point that their juices are in full flow.  Grilling, frying, and roasting are the usual fast methods. Tough cuts are best heated  for a prolonged period at temperatures approaching the boil, usually by stewing,  braising, or slow-roasting.  It’s Easy to Overcook Tender Meat   Cooking tender meat to perfection — so that  its internal temperature is just what we want — is a real challenge. Imagine that we  grill a thick steak just to medium rare, 140ºF/60ºC, at the center. Its surface will  have dried out enough to get hotter than the boiling point, and in between the  center and surface, the meat temperature spans the range between 140ºF/60°C —  medium rare — and 212ºF/100°C — cooked dry. In fact the bulk of the meat is  overcooked. And it only takes a minute or two to overshoot medium rare at the  center and dry out the whole steak, because meat is cooked but juicy in only a  narrow temperature range, just 30ºF/15ºC. When we grill or fry an inch-thick steak  or chop, the rate of temperature increase at the center can exceed 10ºF/5ºC per  minute.  Solutions: Two-Stage Cooking, Insulation, Anticipation   There are several ways to  give the cook a larger window of time for stopping the cooking, and to obtain  meat that is more evenly done.  The most common method is to divide the cooking into two stages, an initial high-  temperature surface browning, and a subsequent cooking through at a much  lower temperature. The low cooking temperature means a smaller temperature  difference between center and surface, so that more of the meat is within a few  degrees of the center temperature. It also means that the meat cooks more slowly,  with a larger window of time during which the interior is properly done.  Another trick is to cover the meat surface with another food, such as strips of fat or  bacon, batters and breadings, pastry and bread dough. These materials insulate  the meat surface from direct cooking heat and slow the heat penetration.  Cooks can also avoid zooming through the zone of ideal doneness by removing  the meat from the oven or pan before it’s completely done, and relying on  lingering afterheat to finish the cooking more gradually, until the surface cools  enough to draw the heat back out of the meat interior. The extent of afterheating  depends on the meat’s weight, shape, and center temperature, and the cooking  temperature, and can range from a negligible few degrees in a thin cut to  20ºF/10ºC in a large roast.
The influence of cooking temperature on the evenness of cooking. Left: In meat  cooked through over high heat, the outer layer gets overcooked while the center  reaches the desired temperature. Right: In meat cooked through over low heat, the  outer layers get less overcooked, and the meat is more evenly done.  Knowing When to Stop Cooking   The key to cooking meat properly is knowing  when to stop. Cookbooks are full of formulas for obtaining a given doneness — so  many minutes per pound or per inch thickness — but these are at best rough  approximations. There are a number of unpredictable and significant factors that  they just can’t take into account. Cooking time is affected by the meat’s starting  temperature, the true temperatures of frying pans and ovens, and the number of  times the meat is flipped or the oven door opened. The meat’s fat content matters,  because fat is less conductive than the muscle fibers: fatty cuts cook more slowly  than lean ones. Bones make a difference too. The ceramic-like minerals in bone  give it double the heat conductivity of meat, but its frequently honeycombed,  hollow structure generally slows its transfer of heat and turns bone into an  insulator. This is why meat is often said to be “tender at the bone,” more succulent  there because less thoroughly cooked. Finally, cooking time depends on how the  meat’s surface is treated. Naked or basted meat evaporates moisture from its  surface, which cools the meat and slows cooking, but a layer of fat or a film of oil  forms a barrier to such evaporation and can cut cooking times by a fifth.  With so many variables affecting cooking time, it’s clear that no formula or recipe  can predict it infallibly. It’s up to the cook to monitor the cooking and decide when  it should stop.  Judging Doneness   The best instruments for monitoring the doneness of meat  remain   the   cook’s   eye   and   finger.   Measuring   internal   temperature   with   a  thermometer works well for roasts but not for smaller cuts. (Standard kitchen  thermometers register temperature along an inch span of their thick metal shaft,  not just at the tip. Dial thermometers also require frequent recalibration to
maintain their accuracy.) The simplest way to be sure is to cut into the meat and  check its color (the loss of fluid is local and minor).  Most professional cooks still evaluate meats by their “feel” and by the way their  juices flow:  •   Bleu   meat, cooked at the surface but just warmed within, remains relatively  unchanged — soft to the touch, like the muscle between thumb and  forefinger when it’s completely relaxed, with little or no colored juice (some  colorless fat may melt out).  •   Rare   meat, some of whose protein has coagulated, is more resilient when  poked with the finger — like the thumb-forefinger muscle when the two  digits are stretched apart — and red juice begins to appear at the surface. To  some people this is meat at its most succulent; to others it is still raw,  “bloody” (though the juices are not blood), and potentially hazardous.  •   Medium -done meat, whose connective-tissue collagen has shrunk, is more  firm — like the thumb-forefinger muscle when the two digits are squeezed  together — and squeezes droplets of red juice to steak and chop surfaces,  while the interior pales to pink. Most but not all microbes are killed in this  range.  •   Well-done   meat, nearly all its proteins denatured, is frankly stiff to the touch,  little juice is apparent, and both juice and interior are a dull tan or gray.  Microbes are dead, and many meat lovers would say that the meat is too.  However,   prolonged,   gentle   cooking   will   loosen   the   connective-tissue  harness and bring back a degree of tenderness.  Meat Doneness and Safety  As we’ve seen, meats inevitably harbor bacteria, and it takes temperatures of  160ºF/70ºC or higher to guarantee the rapid destruction of the bacteria that can  cause human disease — temperatures at which meat is well-done and has lost  much of its moisture. So is eating juicy, pink-red meat risky? Not if the cut is an  intact piece of healthy muscle tissue, a steak or chop, and its surface has been  thoroughly cooked: bacteria are on the meat surfaces, not inside. Ground meats  are riskier, because the contaminated meat surface is broken into small fragments  and spread throughout the mass. The interior of a raw hamburger usually does  contain bacteria, and is safest if cooked well done. Raw meat dishes — steak
tartare and carpaccio — should be prepared only at the last minute from cuts  carefully trimmed of their surfaces.  Making a Safer Rare Hamburger   One way to enjoy a less risky rare hamburger is  to grind the meat yourself after a quick treatment that will kill surface bacteria.  Bring a large pot of water to a rolling boil, immerse the pieces of meat in the water  for 30–60 seconds, then remove, drain and pat dry, and grind in a scrupulously  clean meat grinder. The blanching kills surface bacteria while overcooking only the  outer 1–2 millimeters, which grinding then disperses invisibly throughout the rest  of the meat.  Now that we understand the basic nature of heat and how it moves into and  through meat, let’s survey the common methods of cooking meat and how to  make the best of them.  Cooking Fresh Meat: The Methods  Many traditional meat recipes were developed at a time when meats came from  mature, fatty animals, and so were fairly tolerant of overcooking. Fat coats and  lubricates meat fibers during cooking, and stimulates the flow of saliva and creates  the sensation of juiciness no matter how dry the meat fibers themselves have  become. Recipes for hours-long braising or stewing were developed for mature  animals with substantially cross-linked collagen that took a long time to dissolve  into gelatin. However, today’s industrially produced meats come from relatively  young animals with more soluble collagen and with far less fat; they cook quickly,  and suffer more from overcooking. Grilled chops and steaks may be just right at  the center but dry elsewhere; long-braised pot roasts and stews are often dry  throughout.  The cook’s margin of error in cooking meat is narrower than it used to be. So it’s  more useful than ever to understand how the various methods for cooking meat  work, and how best to apply them to the meat of the 21st century.  Modifying Texture Before and After Cooking  There are a number of traditional techniques that tenderize tough meat before  cooking, so that the cooking itself, and the drying of the muscle fibers, can be  minimized. The most straightforward of these is to damage the meat structure
physically,   to   fragment   the   muscle   fibers   and   connective-tissue   sheets   by  pounding, cutting, or grinding. Pieces of veal pounded into sheets ( escalopes,  scallopini ) are both tenderized and made so thin that they cook through in a  moisture-sparing minute or two. Grinding the meat into small pieces creates an  entirely different sort of texture: the gently gathered ground beef in a good  hamburger has a delicate quality quite unlike even a tender steak.  A traditional and labor-intensive French method for modifying tough meat is  larding,   the insertion of slivers of pork fat into the meat by means of hollow  needles. In addition to augmenting the meat’s fat content, larding also breaks  some fibers and connective-tissue sheets.  Marinades   Marinades are acidic liquids, originally vinegar and now including such  ingredients as wine, fruit juices, buttermilk, and yogurt, in which the cook  immerses meat for hours to days before cooking. They have been used since  Renaissance times, when their primary function was to slow spoilage and to  provide flavor. Today, meats are marinated primarily to flavor them and to make  them more moist and tender. Perhaps the most common marinated meat dish is a  stew, for which the meat is immersed in a mixture of wine and herbs and then  cooked in it.  The acid in marinades does weaken muscle tissue and increase its ability to retain  moisture. But marinades penetrate slowly, and can give the meat surface an overly  sour flavor while they do so. The penetration time can be reduced by cutting meat  into thin pieces or by using a cooking syringe to inject the marinade into larger  pieces.  Meat Tenderizers   Meat tenderizers are protein-digesting enzymes extracted from  a number of plants, including papaya, pineapple, fig, kiwi, and ginger. They are  available either in the original fruit or leaf, or purified and powdered for the shaker,  diluted in salt and sugar. (Despite lore to the contrary, wine corks do not contain  active enzymes and don’t tenderize octopus or other tough meats!) The enzymes  act slowly at refrigerator or room temperature, and some five times faster between  140 and 160ºF/60–70ºC, so nearly all the tenderizing action takes place during  cooking. The problem with tenderizers is that they penetrate into meat even more  slowly than acids, a few millimeters per day, so that the meat surface tends to  accumulate too much and get overly mealy, while the interior remains unaffected.  The distribution can be improved by injecting the tenderizer into the meat.
Brining   The tendency of modern meats to dry out led cooks to rediscover light  brining, a traditional method in Scandinavia and elsewhere. The meats, typically  poultry or pork, are immersed in a brine containing 3 to 6% salt by weight for  anywhere from a few hours to two days (depending on thickness) before being  cooked as usual. They come out noticeably juicier.  Brining has two initial effects. First, salt disrupts the structure of the muscle  filaments. A 3% salt solution (2 tablespoons per quart/30 gm per liter) dissolves  parts of the protein structure that supports the contracting filaments, and a 5.5%  solution (4 tablespoons per quart/60 gm per liter) partly dissolves the filaments  themselves. Second, the interactions of salt and proteins result in a greater water-  holding capacity in the muscle cells, which then absorb water from the brine. (The  inward movement of salt and water and disruptions of the muscle filaments into  the meat also increase its absorption of aromatic molecules from any herbs and  spices in the brine.) The meat’s weight increases by 10% or more. When cooked,  the meat still loses around 20% of its weight in moisture, but this loss is counter-  balanced by the brine absorbed, so the moisture loss is effectively cut in half. In  addition, the dissolved protein filaments can’t coagulate into normally dense  aggregates, so the cooked meat seems more tender. Because the brine works its  way in from the outside, it has its earliest and strongest effects on the meat region  most likely to be overcooked, so even a brief, incomplete soaking can make a  difference.  The obvious disadvantage of brining is that it makes both the meat and its  drippings quite salty. Some recipes balance the saltiness by including sugar or  such ingredients as fruit juice or buttermilk, which provide both sweetness and  sourness.  Shredding   Even if a tough roast has been cooked to the point that it has become  tender but unpleasantly dry, the cook can restore a certain succulence to the meat  by pulling it apart into small shreds and pouring over them the meat’s collected  juices, or a sauce. A film of liquid clings to the surface of each shred and thus coats  many fibers with some of their lost moisture. The finer the shredding, the greater  the surface that can take up liquid, and the moister the meat will seem. When  “pulled” meat and sauce are very hot, the sauce is more fluid and tends to run off  the shreds; when cooler, the sauce becomes thicker and clings more tenaciously to  the meat.
Flames, Glowing Coals, and Coils  Fire and red-hot coals were probably the first heat sources used to cook meat, and  thanks to temperatures high enough to generate browning-reaction aromas, they  can produce the most flavorful results. But this “primitive” method takes some care  to get a juicy interior underneath the delicious crust.  Grilling and Broiling   The term “grilling” is generally used to mean cooking meat  on a metal grate directly over the heat source, while “broiling” means cooking meat  in a pan below the heat source. The heat source may be glowing coals, an open gas  flame, or ceramic blocks heated by a gas flame, or a glowing electrical element.  The primary means of heat transfer is infrared radiation, the direct emission of  energy in the form of light: hence the glow of coals, flames, and heating elements  (p. 781). The meat surface is only a few inches away from the heat, which is very  hot indeed: gas burns at around 3,000ºF/1,650ºC, coals and electrical elements  glow at 2,000ºF/1,100ºC. Because these temperatures can blacken food surfaces  before the inside is cooked through, grilling is limited to such relatively thin and  tender cuts as chops, steaks, poultry parts, and fish.  The most flexible grill arrangement is a dense bed of glowing coals or high gas  flame under one area for surface browning, sparser coals or a lower gas flame  under another for cooking through, and the distance between meat and fire an  inch or two. The meat is cooked over high heat to brown each side well but as  briefly as possible, in two or three minutes, and then moved to the cooler area to  heat through gently and evenly.  Aids to Successful Grilling and Frying: Warm Meat and Frequent Flips  Because grilling and frying involve high heat, they tend to overcook the outer  portions of meat while the interior cooks through. This overcooking can be  minimized in two ways: prewarming the meat, and flipping it frequently.  •   The warmer the meat starts out, the less time it takes to cook through,  and so the less time the outer layers are exposed to high heat. The  cooking and overcooking time can be reduced by a third or more by  wrapping steaks and chops, immersing them for 30–60 minutes in
warm water, so that they approach body temperature, 100ºF/40ºC, and  then cooking immediately (bacteria grow quickly on warm meat).  •   How often should the cook turn a steak or hamburger when grilling or  frying? If perfect grill marks are necessary, once or twice. If texture and  moistness are more important, then flip every minute. Frequent turns  mean that neither side has the time either to absorb or to release large  amounts of heat. The meat cooks faster, and its outer layers end up less  overdone.  Spit-Roasting   Spit-roasting — impaling meat on a metal or wood spike and  turning it continuously near the radiating heat source — is best suited to large,  bulky cuts, including roasts and whole animals. It exposes the meat surface to  browning temperatures, but it does so both evenly and intermittently. Each area  receives an intense, browning blast of infrared radiation, but only for a few  seconds. During the many seconds when it faces away from the heat, the hot  surface gives up much of its heat to the air, so only a fraction of each blast  penetrates into the meat, and the interior therefore cooks through relatively  gently. In addition, the constant rotation causes the juices to cling to and travel  around the meat surface, basting and coating it with proteins and sugars for the  browning reactions.  The full advantages of spit roasting are obtained when the roasting is done in the  open air, or in an oven with the door ajar. A closed oven quickly heats up to baking  temperatures, and the meat will accordingly heat through less gently.  Barbecuing   This distinctively American cooking method took its modern form  about a century ago. Barbecuing is the low-temperature, slow heating of meat in a  closed chamber by means of hot air from smoldering wood coals. It’s an outdoor  cousin to the slow oven roast, and produces smoky, fall-apart tender meat.  Modern barbecuing devices allow the cook to control the amount of heat and  smoke produced, and facilitate periodic basting with a wide range of sauces, most  of them spicy and vinegary, to intensify flavor, moisten the meat surface, and  further slow the cooking. In the best devices, the wood is burned in one chamber  and the meat cooked in a second connected chamber, so that there’s no direct
radiation from the coals, and only the relatively cool smoke (around 200ºF/90ºC)  transfers heat, inefficiently and therefore gently. It takes several hours to bring  large cuts of meat — slabs of ribs, pork shoulders and legs, beef briskets — to an  internal temperature of 165–70ºF/75ºC, and a whole hog will take 18 hours or  more. These are ideal conditions for the tenderizing of tough, inexpensive cuts.  Many barbecued meats end up with a “smoke ring,” a permanent pink or red zone  under the surface (p. 149).  Food Words:   Barbecue  The term   barbecue   comes via the Spanish   barbacoa   from the West Indies, and a  Taino word that meant a framework of green sticks suspended on corner posts, on  which meat, fish, and other foods were laid and cooked in the open over fire and  coals. Both the height and the fire were adjustable, so food could either be quickly  grilled or slowly smoked and dried. In American colonial times the   barbecue   was a  popular and festive bout of mass outdoor meat cooking. By the beginning of the  20th century it had evolved into the familiar slow cooking of highly flavored meat.  Hot Air and Walls: Oven “Roasting”  In contrast to the grill, the oven is an indirect and more uniform means of cooking.  The primary heat source, whether flame, coil, or coal, heats the oven, and the oven  then heats the food from all sides, by means of convection currents of hot air and  infrared radiation from the oven walls (p. 784). Oven heating is a relatively slow  method, well suited to large cuts of meat that take time to heat through. Its  efficiency is especially influenced by the cooking temperature, which can be  anything from 200 up to 500ºF/95–260ºC and above. Cooking times range from 60  to 10 (or fewer) minutes per pound/500 gm.  Low Oven Temperatures   At low oven temperatures, below 250ºF/125ºC, the  moist meat surface dries very slowly. As moisture evaporates, it actually cools the  surface, so despite the oven temperature, the surface temperature of the meat  may be as low as 160ºF/70ºC. This means relatively little surface browning and long  cooking times, but also very gentle heating of the interior, minimal moisture loss, a
relatively uniform doneness within the meat, and a large window of time in which  the meat is properly done. In addition, a slow inner temperature rise to 140ºF/60ºC  — over the course of several hours in a large roast — allows the meat’s own  protein-breaking enzymes to do some tenderizing (p. 144). Ovens equipped with  fans to force the hot air over the meat (“forced convection”) improve surface  browning at low roasting temperatures. Low-temperature roasting is suited to  both tender cuts, whose moistness it preserves, and tough cuts that benefit from  long cooking to dissolve collagen into gelatin.  High Oven Temperatures   At high oven temperatures, 400ºF/200ºC and above, the  meat surface quickly browns and develops the characteristic roasted flavor, and  cooking times are short. On the other hand, the meat loses a lot of moisture, its  outer portions end up much hotter than the center, and the center can go from  done to overdone in just a few minutes.  High-temperature roasting is ideal for tender and relatively small cuts of meat that  cook through quickly, and whose surface wouldn’t have time to brown without the  exposure to high heat.  Predicting Roasting Times  A number of different guidelines have been proposed for predicting how  much time it should take to roast a given piece of meat. Minutes per inch  thickness and minutes per pound are the usual approximations. However, the  mathematics of heat transfer show that cooking times are actually  proportional to the thickness   squared,   or to the weight   to the   power. ⅔   And  the cooking time also depends on many other factors. There is no simple and  accurate equation that can tell us how long to cook a particular piece of meat  in our particular kitchen. The best we can do is monitor the actual cooking,  and anticipate when we should stop by following the temperature rise at the  center of the meat.  Moderate Oven Temperatures   Moderate temperatures, around 350ºF/175ºC,  offer a compromise that produces acceptable results with many cuts of meat. So  does a two-stage cooking: for example, starting the oven at a high temperature for
an initial browning (or browning the meat on the stovetop in a hot pan), and then  turning the thermostat down to cook the meat through more gently.  The Effects of Shielding and Basting   At moderate and hot oven temperatures,  the oven walls, ceiling, and floor radiate heat energy in significant amounts. This  means that if an object lies between the food and one of the oven surfaces, the  food will receive less heat from that direction and will cook more slowly. This  shielding effect can be both a nuisance and a useful tool. The pan underneath a  roast slows the heating of the roast bottom, and the cook should turn the roast  periodically to make sure that top and bottom receive equal amounts of heat. But  a sheet of aluminum foil deliberately placed over the meat will deflect a substantial  portion of heat energy and thus slow the cooking of the whole roast. So will  basting with a water-containing liquid, which cools the meat surface as it  evaporates.  The Challenge of Whole Birds   Chickens, turkeys, and other meat birds are difficult  to roast whole, because their two kinds of meat are best cooked differently. The  tender breast meat gets dry and tough if heated much above 155ºF/68ºC. The leg  meat is full of connective tissue, and is chewy if cooked to less than 165ºF/73ºC. So  usually the cook must choose: either the leg meat is sufficiently cooked and the  breast meat dry, or the breast meat succulent and the leg meat gristly.  Cooks try to overcome this dilemma in many ways. They turn the bird in various  routines to expose the thigh joint to more heat. They cover the breast with foil, or  with wet cheesecloth, or strips of pork fat (“barding”), or baste it, all to slow its  cooking. They cover the breast with an ice pack and let the bird sit at room  temperature for an hour, so that the legs start the cooking warmer than the breast.  They brine the bird to juice up its breast. Perfectionists cut the bird up and roast  legs and breasts separately.  The Keys to Crisp Skin  One of the special pleasures of a well-cooked bird is its crisp, rich skin. The  skin of birds and other animals is mainly water (about 50%), fat (40%), and  connective-tissue collagen (3%). In order to crisp the skin, the cook must  dissolve the leathery collagen into tender gelatin in the skin’s water, and then
vaporize the water out of the skin. The high heat of a hot oven or frying pan  does this most effectively; slow cooking at a low oven temperature can  desiccate the skin while its collagen is intact, and preserve its leatheriness. A  crisp skin is easier to obtain with a dry-processed bird — kosher or halal, for  example — whose skin hasn’t been plumped with added water (p. 143). It  also helps to let the bird air-dry uncovered in the refrigerator for a day or two,  and to oil the skin before roasting. (Oiling improves heat transfer from hot  oven air to moist meat.) The cooked bird should be served promptly, since  crisp skin quickly reabsorbs moisture from the hot meat beneath, and  becomes flabby as it sits on the plate.  Hot Metal: Frying, or Sautéing  Simple frying, or sautéing, cooks by the direct conduction of heat energy from hot  metal pan to meat, usually via a thin layer of oil that prevents the meat from  sticking and conducts heat evenly across minute gaps between meat and pan.  Metals are the best heat conductors known, and frying therefore cooks the meat  surface rapidly. Its distinctive characteristic is the ability to brown and flavor the  meat surface in a matter of seconds. This searing action requires a combination of  heat source and pan that can maintain a high temperature even while the leaking  meat juices are being vaporized. If the pan gets cool enough to let moisture  accumulate — for example because it was insufficiently preheated, or overloaded  with cold wet meat — then the meat stews in its own juices until they boil off, and  its surface doesn’t brown well. (The same thing will happen if the pan is covered,  so that the water vapor is trapped and falls back into the pan.) The appetizing  sizzle of frying meat is actually the sound of moisture from the meat being  vaporized as it hits the hot metal pan, and cooks use this sound to judge the pan  temperature. A continuous strong hiss indicates the immediate conversion of  moisture to steam by a hot pan, and efficient surface browning; weak and irregular  sputtering indicates that the moisture is collecting in distinct droplets, and the pan  is barely hot enough to boil it off.  Because frying is a rapid cooking method, it’s applied mainly to the same thin,  tender cuts best suited for grilling and broiling. As with grilling, frying will be both
faster and gentler if the meat starts at room temperature or above and is turned  frequently (see box, p. 156). Cooks make frying even more efficient by pressing  down on the meat — with the spatula or a heavy pan or brick — to improve the  thermal contact between meat and pan. For thicker cuts whose insides take time  to heat through, the cook slows heat transfer after the initial browning to prevent  the outer portions from being overcooked. This can be done simply by lowering  the burner heat, or by shifting the pan to the oven, which continues the heating  from all sides and frees the cook from the necessity of turning the meat. Restaurant  cooks often “finish” fried meats by putting the pan in the oven as soon as the first  side has been browned and the meat turned.  Hot Oil: Shallow and Deep Frying  Fats and oils are a useful cooking medium because they can be heated to  temperatures well above the boiling point of water, and can therefore dry, crisp,  and brown the food surface. In shallow-fat frying, pieces of meat are cooked in  enough melted fat or oil to bathe the bottom and sides of the meat; in deep-fat  frying, there’s enough oil to immerse the meat completely. Heat is transferred from  the pan to the meat by way of convection currents in the fat or oil. These materials  are less efficient than both metal and water at transferring heat, and yet more than  twice as efficient as an oven. This thermal moderation, together with the ability to  contact the meat evenly and intimately, makes fat frying an especially versatile  technique. It’s used primarily for poultry and fish, everything from thin fillets and  chicken breasts to whole 15 lb/7 kg turkeys, which take something over an hour to  cook (compared to two or three hours in the oven). The usual cooking temperature  ranges between 300 and 350ºF/150 and 175ºC. The oil starts out near 350º, cools  when the meat is introduced and its moisture begins to boil and bubble away,  then heats up again as moisture flow slows and the burner heat catches up. The  temperature is high enough to dehydrate, brown, and crisp the surface, while the  gradual movement of heat into the meat gives the cook a reasonable window of  time in which to stop the cooking while the meat is still moist.  For some purposes, meats may be partly precooked at a relatively low oil  temperature, and then cooked through and browned at a higher temperature just  before serving. Fast-food fried chicken is prepared in special pressure cookers (p.  785), which fry at the usual oil temperatures, but raise the boiling point of water, so  that less of the moisture in the meat vaporizes during the cooking. The result is
more rapid cooking (less cooling by evaporation) and moister meat.  Breadings and Batters   Nearly all meats that are shallow- or deep-fried are coated  with a layer of dry breading or flour-based batter before they’re cooked. These  coatings do not “seal in” moisture. Instead, they provide a thin but critical layer of  insulation that buffers the meat surface from direct contact with the oil. The  coating, not the meat, quickly dries out into a pleasingly crisp surface, and forms a  poorly conducting matrix of dry starch with pockets of steam or immobilized oil.  Because rare meat that still exudes juice would quickly make the crisp crust soggy,  oil-fried meats are generally cooked until bubbling in the oil ceases, a sign that  their juices have ceased to flow.  Hot Water: Braising, Stewing, Poaching, Simmering  As a medium for cooking meat, water has several advantages. It transmits heat  rapidly and evenly; its own temperature is easily adjusted to the cook’s needs, and  it can carry and impart flavor and become a sauce. Unlike oil, it can’t get hot  enough to generate browning flavors at the meat surface; but meats can be  prebrowned and then finished in water-based liquids.  There are several names for the simple and versatile method of heating meat in  these liquids, which may be meat or vegetable stock, milk, wine or beer, pureed  fruits or vegetables. The many variations involve differences in the cooking liquid  used, the size of the meat pieces, the relative proportions of meat and liquid, and  initial precooking. (Braises and pot roasts involve larger cuts and less liquid than do  stews.) In all of them, however, the key variable is temperature, which should be  kept well below the boil, around 180ºF/80ºC, so that the outer portions don’t  overcook badly. Many slow braises and stews are cooked in a low oven, but the  usual temperatures specified — 325–350ºF/165–175ºC — are high enough that  they’ll eventually raise the contents of a covered pot to the boil. Unless the pot is  left uncovered, which allows cooling evaporation (and concentrates and creates  flavor at the liquid surface), the oven temperature should be kept below 200ºF.  (The original   braisier   in France was a closed pot sitting on and topped with a few  live coals.)  Meats cooked in liquid should be allowed to cool in that liquid, and are best served  at temperatures well below the cooking temperature, around 120ºF/50ºC. The  capacity of the meat tissue to hold water increases as it cools, so it will actually
reabsorb some of the liquid it lost during the cooking.  Food Words:   Poach, Simmer, Braise, Stew  These various terms for the same basic process have wildly different origins.  Poach   is a medieval word from the French for the “pouch” of gently cooked  egg white that forms around the yolk. The original 16th-century form of  simmer   was   simper,   an affected, conceited facial expression, the connection  possibly being the coy blinking of the bubbles as they begin to break at the  surface.   Braise   and   stew   are both 18th-century borrowings from the French,  the first coming from a word for “coal,” and referring to the practice of putting  coals under and atop the cooking pot, the second from   étuve,   meaning stove  or heated room and so a hot enclosure.  The Searing Question  The best-known explanation of a cooking method is probably this catchy phrase:  “Sear the meat to seal in the juices.”   The eminent German chemist Justus von Liebig  came up with this idea around 1850. It was disproved a few decades later. Yet this  myth lives on, even among professional cooks.  Before Liebig, most cooks in Europe cooked roasts through at some distance from  the fire, or protected by a layer of greased paper, and then browned them quickly at  the end. Juice retention was not a concern. But Liebig thought that the water-  soluble components of meat were nutritionally important, so it was worth  minimizing their loss. In his book   Researches on the Chemistry of Food,   he said that  this could be done by heating the meat quickly enough that the juices are  immediately sealed inside. He explained what happens when a piece of meat is  plunged into boiling water, and then the temperature reduced to a simmer:  When it is introduced into the boiling water, the albumen immediately  coagulates from the surface inwards, and in this state forms a crust or  shell, which no longer permits the external water to penetrate into the  interior of the mass of flesh…. The flesh retains its juiciness, and is quite  as agreeable to the taste as it can be made by roasting; for the chief
part of the sapid [flavorful] constituents of the mass is retained, under  these circumstances, in the flesh.  And if the crust can keep water out during boiling, it can keep the juices  in during roasting, so it’s best to sear the roast immediately, and then  continue at a lower temperature to finish the insides.  Liebig’s ideas caught on very quickly among cooks and cookbook writers, including  the eminent French chef Auguste Escoffier. But simple experiments in the 1930s  showed that Liebig was wrong. The crust that forms around the surface of the meat  is not waterproof, as any cook has experienced: the continuing sizzle of meat in the  pan or oven or on the grill is the sound of moisture continually escaping and  vaporizing. In fact, moisture loss is proportional to meat temperature, so the high  heat of searing actually dries out the meat surface more than moderate heat does.  But searing does flavor the meat surface with products of the browning reactions  (p. 777), and flavor gets our juices flowing. Liebig and his followers were wrong  about meat juices, but they were right that searing makes delicious meat.  Tender Meats:   Surprisingly Quick Cooking   Hot water is such an effective heat  transmitter that it cooks flat tender cuts of meat very quickly. Chops, chicken  breasts, fish steaks and filets will all be done in just a few minutes. If they’re  browned first in a frying pan to develop flavor, they may need only a minute or two  to finish cooking through. For the most consistent results with tender meats, bring  the braising liquid to the boil, add the meat to destroy surface bacteria, and after a  few seconds add some cold liquid to cool the pan to 180ºF/80ºC, so that the outer  portions of the meat won’t overheat and there is a broader window of time during  which the center is properly done. If the liquid needs to be boiled down to  concentrate flavor or to create a thicker consistency for a sauce, remove the meat  first.  Tough and Large Cuts: Slower Means Moister   Meats with a significant amount of  tough connective tissue must be cooked to a minimum of 160–180ºF/70–80ºC to  dissolve their collagen into gelatin, but that temperature range is well above the  140–150ºF/60–65ºC at which the muscle fibers lose their juices. So it’s a challenge  to make tough meats succulent. The key is to cook slowly, at or just above the  collagen-dissolving minimum, to minimize the drying-out of the fibers. The meat  should be checked regularly and taken off the heat as soon as its fibers are easily
pushed apart (“fork tender”). The connective tissue itself can help, because once  dissolved, its gelatin holds onto some of the juice squeezed from the muscle fibers  and thus imparts a kind of succulence to the meat. The shanks, shoulders, and  cheeks of young animals are rich in collagen and so make fairly forgiving, gelatin-  thickened braises.  One useful ingredient in long-cooked braises and stews can be a prolonged time  — an hour or two — during which the cook carefully manages the meat’s  temperature rise up to the simmer. The time that the meat spends below  120ºF/50ºC amounts to a period of accelerated aging that weakens the connective  tissue and reduces the time needed at fiber-drying temperatures. One sign that  braised or stewed meat has been heated very gently and gradually is a distinct red  color throughout the meat, even though it’s well done: the same slow heating that  allows meat enzymes to tenderize and flavor the meat also allows more of the  myoglobin pigment to remain intact (p. 149).  Guidelines for Succulent Braises and Stews  A moist, tender braise or stew results from the cook’s cumulative attention to  several details of procedure. The most important rule: never let the meat  interior get anywhere near the boil.  •   Keep the meat as intact as possible to minimize cut surfaces through  which fluids can escape.  •   If the meat must be cut, cut it into relatively large pieces, at least an  inch/2.5 cm on a side.  •   Brown the meat very quickly in a hot pan so that the inside of the meat  warms only slightly. This kills microbes on the meat surfaces, and  creates flavor.  •   Start the pot with meat and cooking liquid in a cold oven, the pot lid  ajar to allow some evaporation, and set the thermostat to 200ºF/93ºC,  so that it heats the stew to around 120ºF/50ºC slowly, over two hours.  •   Raise the oven temperature to 250ºF/120ºC so that the stew slowly  warms from 120ºF to 180ºF/80ºC.
•   After an hour, check the meat every half hour, and stop the cooking  when it is easily penetrated by the tines of a fork. Let the meat cool in  the stew, where it will reabsorb some liquid.  •   The liquid will probably need to be reduced by boiling to improve flavor  and consistency. Remove the meat first.  Water Vapor: Steaming  Steaming is by far the fastest method for pouring heat into food, thanks to the  large amount of energy that water vapor releases when it condenses into droplets  on the food surface. However, it works rapidly only as long as the meat surface is  cooler than the boiling point. Because heat moves through meat more slowly than  steam deposits it on the surface, heat accumulates at the surface, which soon  reaches the boiling point, and the heat transfer rate falls to a level just sufficient to  keep the surface at the boil. Though it heats meat by means of moisture, steaming  does not guarantee moist meat. Muscle fibers heated to the boiling point shrink  and squeeze out much of their moisture, and the steamy atmosphere can’t replace  it.  Because steaming brings the meat surface to the boil so quickly, it’s a method best  suited to thin, tender cuts of meat that will cook through quickly in just a few  minutes, before their outer portions become badly overcooked and dried out.  Meats are often wrapped — in an edible lettuce or cabbage leaf, an inedible but  flavorsome banana leaf or corn husk, or in parchment or foil — to protect the  surface from the harsh steam heat and cook it more gradually. The meat must be  arranged on an open rack in a single layer or else in separate tiers; any surface not  exposed directly to the atmosphere inside the pot will cook much more slowly  than the rest. The pot should contain enough water that it won’t cook dry as steam  escapes around the lid. Herbs and spices are often included in the water to  aromatize the meat.  Low-Temperature Steam   When steaming, the cook usually takes care to keep the  lid tight on the pot and the heat high, to make sure that the pot atmosphere is  saturated   with   vapor.   However   steaming   can   also   be   done   at   reduced
temperatures and therefore more gently. Water at a 180ºF/80ºC simmer in a  covered pot will keep the pot atmosphere around 180º as well, and leave the outer  portions of the meat less overdone. In China, some dishes are steamed in open  pots, where the water vapor mixes with ambient air and the temperature is well  below the boil. Commercial convection steamers can produce saturated vapor all  the way from body temperature to the boil. They make it possible for restaurant  cooks to prepare moist meats and fish with very little attention and keep them at  serving temperature until needed.  High-Pressure and Low-Pressure Cooking   While conventional cooking is limited  to an effective maximum temperature of the boiling point of water (p. 784), the  pressure cooker allows us to raise that maximum from 212 to 250ºF/100 to 120ºC.  It does so by tightly sealing the meat and cooking liquid in the pan and allowing  the vaporizing water to build up the pressure to about double the normal air  pressure at sea level. This increased pressure increases the boiling point, and high  pressure and temperature put together produce an overall doubling or tripling of  the heat transfer rate into the meat, as well as an extremely efficient conversion of  collagen into gelatin. Pot roasts cook in less than an hour instead of two or three.  Of course the proteins get very hot and therefore squeeze out much of their  moisture; meat must be well endowed with fat and collagen to end up anything  but dry.  At the other end of the pressure scale is cooking at high altitude, where the  atmospheric pressure is significantly lower than it is at sea level. The boiling point  of water is also lower (203ºF/95ºC at mile-high Denver, 194ºF/90ºC at 10,000  feet/3,000 meters), and meat cooking more gentle — and more time-consuming.  Microwave Cooking  Microwave cooking is neither dry nor a moist technique, but electromagnetic (p.  786).   High-frequency   radio   waves   generated   in   the   oven   cause   electrically  asymmetrical water molecules to vibrate, and these molecules in turn heat up the  rest of the tissue. Because radio waves penetrate organic matter, the meat is  cooked directly to a depth of an inch or so. Microwave cooking is thus very fast,  but it also tends to result in greater fluid loss than conventional means. Generally,  large cuts of meats “roasted” in the microwave oven get badly overcooked in the  outer inch while the interior cooks through; they end up dryer and tougher than
standard roasts. Since the air in the oven is not heated, microwave ovens can’t  brown meat surfaces unless they’re assisted by special packaging or a broiling  element. (An exception to this rule is cured meats like bacon, which get so dry  when cooked that they can brown.)  More reliable results can be obtained in the microwave oven when the meat is  immersed in some liquid, cooked in a loosely covered container, and checked  carefully for signs of proper doneness. There’s some evidence that microwaves are  unusually effective at dissolving collagen into gelatin.  After the Cooking: Resting, Carving, and Serving  A meat dish can be cooked perfectly and yet disappoint if it’s mishandled on the  way to the table. Large oven roasts should be allowed to rest on the countertop for  at least a half hour before carving, not only to allow the “afterheat” to finish  cooking the center (p. 153), but also to allow the meat to cool down, ideally to  120ºF/50ºC or so. (This may take well over an hour; some chefs allow for a rest  period equal to the roasting time.) As the temperature drops, the meat structure  becomes firmer and more resistant to deformation, and its water-holding capacity  increases. Cooling therefore makes the meat easier to carve and reduces the  amount of fluid lost during carving.  Whenever possible, meat is carved across the grain of the muscle fibers to reduce  the impression of fibrousness in the mouth and make the meat easier to chew.  Carving knives should be kept sharp. Sawing away with a dull blade compresses  the tissue and squeezes its delicious liquid away.  Finally, remember that the saturated fats of beef, lamb, and pork are solid at room  temperature, which means that they rapidly congeal on the plate. Also, gelatinized  collagen begins to set around body temperature and makes the meat seem  noticeably stiffer. Preheated platters and plates prolong the table appeal of any hot  meat dish.  Leftovers  Warmed-Over Flavor   At the same time that cooking develops the characteristic  flavors of meat, it also promotes chemical changes that lead to characteristic, stale,  cardboard-like “warmed-over flavors” when the meat is stored and reheated.
(Complex   or   strongly   flavored   dishes   may   actually   improve   with   time   and  reheating; warmed-over flavor develops within the meat itself.) The principal  source of off-flavors is unsaturated fatty acids, which are damaged by oxygen and  iron from myoglobin. This damage occurs slowly in the refrigerator and more  rapidly during reheating. Meats with a greater proportion of unsaturated fat in  their fat tissue — poultry and pork — are more susceptible to warmed-over flavor  than beef and lamb. Cured meats suffer less because their nitrite acts as an  antioxidant.  There are several ways to minimize the development of off-flavors in leftovers.  Season the food with herbs and spices that contain antioxidant compounds  (chapter 8). Use low-permeability plastic wraps to cover the meat (saran or  polyvinyl   chloride;   polyethylene   is   surprisingly   permeable   to   oxygen),   and  eliminate air pockets in the package. Eat the leftovers as soon as possible, and with  the minimum degree of reheating consistent with safety. Leftover roast chicken,  for example, tastes fresher when served cold.  Maintaining Moistness   If you’ve taken the trouble to cook a meat dish gently,  then apply the same care to reheating: it only takes moments at the boil to dry out  a good stew. Bring the liquid alone to the boil, return the meat to it so that its  surfaces are exposed to the boil very briefly, and then reduce the heat and stir so  that the liquid quickly comes down to 150ºF/65ºC. Then let the meat warm  through at this gentle temperature.  Safety   As a general rule, leftover meats are safest when refrigerated or frozen  within two hours of the end of cooking, and reheated quickly to at least  150ºF/65ºC before serving a second time. To be served cold, the meat should be  well cooked to begin with, refrigerated quickly, and served within a day or two,  fresh out of the refrigerator. If in doubt, it’s best to heat the meat thoroughly, and  compensate for the adverse effects on taste and texture by shredding the meat  and moistening it with a flavorful liquid.  Offal, or Organ Meats  Animals have muscles because they nourish themselves on other living things and  must move around to find them. And they have innards — livers, kidneys,  intestines, and other organs — to break down these complex foods and separate  the   useful   building   blocks   from   waste   materials,   to   distribute   nourishment
throughout the body, and to coordinate the body’s activities.  The word   meat   is used most commonly to mean the limb-moving   skeletal   muscles  of animals. But skeletal muscle only accounts for about half of the animal body. The  various other organs and tissues are also nutritious and offer their own diverse,  often pronounced flavors and textures. The nonskeletal muscles — stomach,  intestines, heart, tongue — generally contain much more connective tissue than  ordinary meats — up to 3 times as much — and benefit from slow, moist cooking  to dissolve the collagen. The liver contains relatively little collagen: it is an  agglomeration of specialized cells held together by a network of connective tissue  that, because it experiences little mechanical stress, is unusually fine and delicate.  Liver is thus tender if minimally cooked, crumbly and dry if overcooked.  Unlike standard meats cut from discrete and largely sterile skeletal muscles, many  organ meats carry extraneous matter. Before cooking, they’re often trimmed and  cleaned, then “blanched,” or covered with cold water that is slowly brought to a  simmer. The slow heating first washes proteins and microbes off the meat, then  coagulates them and floats them to the water surface where they can be skimmed  off. Blanching also moderates strong odors on the meat surface.  Liver  The liver is the biochemical powerhouse of the animal body. Most of the nutrients  that the body absorbs from food go here first and are either stored or processed  for distribution to other organs. All this work takes a lot of energy, and this is why  the liver is dark red with fat-burning mitochondria and their cytochrome pigments.  It also requires direct access of the liver cells to the blood, and accordingly there is  very little connective tissue between the minute hexagonal columns of cells. It’s a  delicate organ that is best briefly cooked; long cooking simply dries it out. The  characteristic flavor of liver has been little investigated, but seems to depend  importantly on sulfur compounds (thiazoles and thiazolines), and gets stronger  with prolonged cooking. Generally, both flavor and texture coarsen with age. The  occasionally milky appearance of chicken livers is due to an unusual but harmless  accumulation of fat, about double the amount in a normal red liver (8% instead of  4%).
Composition of Organ Meats  Organ meats are generally similar to skeletal muscle in their chemical  composition, but often contain substantially more iron and vitamins thanks to  their special tasks. (Poultry heart and liver and veal liver are especially rich in  folate, a vitamin that is associated with a significantly reduced risk of heart  disease.) Their higher cholesterol levels reflect the fact that their cells are  much smaller than muscle cells and therefore include proportionally more  cell membrane, of which cholesterol is an essential component. The chart  below lists broad ranges of nutrient content for organs of various animals.  Cholesterol and iron levels are given in milligrams per 100 grams/3.6 oz; folate  in micrograms per 100 grams.  Meat   Protein, %   Fat, %  Cholesterol,  milligrams  Iron,  milli-  grams  Folate,  micro-  grams  Standard cuts   24–36   5–20   70–160   1–4   5–20  Heart   24–30   5–8   180–250   4–9   3–80  Tongue   21–26   10–21   110–190   2–5   3–8  Gizzard   25–30   3–4   190–230   4–6   50–55  Tripe, beef  (stomach)  15   4   95   2   2  Liver   21–31   5–9   360–630   3–18   70–770  Sweetbreads   12–33   3–23   220–500   1–2   3  Kidney   16–26   3–6   340–800   3–12   20–100  Brain   12–13   10–16   2,000–3,100   2–3   4–6  Foie Gras  Of the various animal innards that cooks have put to good use, one deserves  special mention, because it is in a way the ultimate meat, the epitome of animal  flesh and its essential appeal.   Foie gras   is the “fat liver” of force-fed geese and
ducks. It has been made and appreciated since Roman times and probably long  before; the force-feeding of geese is clearly represented in Egyptian art from 2500  BCE . It’s a kind of living pâté, ingeniously prepared in the growing bird before it’s  slaughtered. Constant overnourishment causes the normally small, lean, red organ  to grow to 10 times its normal size and reach a fat content of 50 to 65%. The fat is  dispersed   in   insensibly   fine   droplets   within   the   liver   cells,   and   creates   an  incomparably integrated, delicate blend of smoothness, richness, and savoriness.  Preparing Foie Gras   A good-quality liver is recognized by its unblemished  appearance, pale thanks to the minute fat droplets, and by its consistency. The liver  tissue itself is firm but pliable (like chicken liver), while the fat is only semisolid at  cool room temperature. When cool and pressed with the finger, a good foie gras  will give, retain the imprint, and feel somewhat supple and unctuous, while an  under-fattened liver will feel elastic, hard, and wet. An overfattened, weakened  liver feels soft and frankly oily.  Foie gras is at its best fresh out of the bird. Apart from its use in pâtés, it is generally  prepared in two ways. One is to slice it fairly thick, briefly saute in a hot, dry pan  until the surface is browned and the interior just warmed through, and serve it  immediately. The sensation of warm, firm, flavorful flesh melting away between  tongue and palate is unparalleled. Liver quality is especially important in this  preparation, since high pan heat will release a flood of fat from an overfattened or  otherwise weakened organ, and the texture is unpleasantly flabby.  A second preparation is to cook the liver whole, chill it, and slice and serve it cool.  This   is   more   forgiving   of   second-quality   livers,   and   offers   its   own   kind   of  lusciousness. To make a terrine, the livers are pressed gently into a container and  cooked in a water bath; to prepare a torchon of foie gras, they’re wrapped in a  cloth and poached in stock or in duck or goose fat. Fat loss is minimized by gentle,  gradual heating just to the desired doneness (from 110 to 160ºF/45–70ºC, lower  temperatures giving a creamier texture), the liquid kept only a few degrees above  the target temperature. Cooling partly solidifies the fat, which allows the terrine or  torchon to be sliced cleanly, and then contributes a melting firmness to the dish’s  texture as it’s eaten.  Skin, Cartilage, and Bones  Usually cooks don’t welcome large amounts of toughening connective tissue in
meat. But taken on their own, animal skin, cartilage, and bones are valuable  exactly because they’re mostly connective tissue and therefore full of collagen  (skin also provides flavorful fat). Connective tissue has two uses. First, in long-  cooked stocks, soups, and stews, it dissolves out of bones or skin to provide large  quantities of gelatin and a substantial body. And second, it can be turned into a  delicious dish itself, with either a succulent gelatinous texture or a crisp, crunchy  one, depending on the cut and the cooking method. Long moist cooking gives  tender veal ears, cheeks, and muzzle for tête de veau, or Chinese beef tendon or  fatty pork skin. A briefer cooking produces crunchy or chewy cartilaginous pig’s  ears, snouts, and tails; and rapid frying gives crisp pork rinds.  Fat  Solid fat tissue is seldom prepared as such: instead we usually extract the fat from  its storage cells, and then use it as both a cooking medium and an ingredient.  There are two major exceptions to this rule. The first is   caul fat,   a thin membrane of  connective tissue with a lacework of small fat deposits embedded in it. This  membrane is the omentum or peritoneum, usually from the pig or sheep, which  covers the organs of the abdominal cavity. Caul fat has been used at least since  Roman times as a wrap to hold foods together and protect and moisten their  surface while they are cooked. During the cooking, much of the fat is rendered  from the membrane and the membrane itself is softened, so that it all but  disappears into the food.  The second fat tissue frequently used as is is mild, soft-textured pork fat, especially  the thick deposits lying immediately under the skin of belly and back. Bacon is  largely fat tissue from the belly, while back fat is the preferred fat for making  sausages (p. 170). Italian   lardo   is pork fat cured in salt, flavorings, and wine, eaten  as is or used to flavor other dishes. In classic French cooking, pork fat is used to  provide both flavor and succulence to lean meats, applied either in a thin sheet  that protects the surface during roasting, or in thin splinters inserted into the meat  by means of larding needles.  Rendered Fats   Pure fat is rendered from fat tissue by cutting the tissue into small  pieces and gently heating them. Some fat melts out of the tissue, and more is  squeezed out by applying pressure. Rendered beef fat is called   tallow,   and pork fat  lard.   The fats from different animals differ in flavor and in consistency. Fats from
ruminant cattle and sheep are more saturated and therefore harder than pig or  bird fats (due to their rumen microbes; seep. 13); and fats stored just under the skin  are less saturated and therefore softer than fats stored in the body core, because  their environment is cooler. Beef suet, from around the kidneys, is the hardest  culinary fat, followed by subcutaneous beef fat, then leaf lard from pig kidneys,  and lard from back and belly fat. Chicken, duck, and goose fat are still less  saturated and so semiliquid at room temperature.  Meat Mixtures  The transformation of a steer or pig into the standard roasts, steaks, and chops  generates a large assortment of scraps and by-products. These remainders have  always been put to use, reassembled into everything from the “goat sausage  bubbling fat and blood” that the disguised Odysseus wins in a warm-up fight  before his battle with Penelope’s suitors, to the Scots haggis of sheep’s liver, heart,  and lung stuffed into its stomach, to the modern canned mixture of ham, pork  shoulder, and flavorings called Spam. Chopped or ground up, mixed with other  ingredients, and pressed together, meat scraps can provide one of the heartiest  parts of a meal — and even one of the most luxurious.  Sausages  The word   sausage   comes from the Latin for “salt,” and names a mixture of chopped  meat and salt stuffed into an edible tube. Salt plays two important roles in the  sausage: it controls the growth of microbes, and it dissolves one of the fiber  filament proteins (myosin) out of the muscle fibers and onto the meat surfaces,  where it acts as a glue to bind the pieces together. Traditionally the edible  container was the animal’s stomach or intestine, and fat accounted for at least a  third of the mixture. Today many sausages are housed in artificial casings and  contain far less fat.  There are an infinite number of variations on the sausage theme, but most of them  fall into a handful of families. Sausages may be sold raw and eaten freshly cooked;  they may be fermented; they may be air-dried, cooked, and/or smoked to varying  degrees in order to keep for a few days or indefinitely. The meat and fat may be  chopped into discrete pieces of varying size, or they may be disintegrated,  blended together, and cooked into a homogeneous mass. And the sausage may
either be mostly meat and fat, or it may include a substantial proportion of other  ingredients.  Fermented sausages are a form of preserved meat, and are described on p. 176.  Fresh   and   Cooked   Sausages   Fresh   sausages   are   just   that:   freshly   made,  unfermented and uncooked, and therefore highly perishable. They should be  cooked within a day or two of being made or purchased.  Cooked sausages are heated as part of their production, and can be bought and  eaten without further cooking for several days, or longer if they’ve been partly  dried or smoked. But they’re often cooked again just before eating. They can be  made from the usual mixture of meat and fat, or from a number of other materials  that thicken on cooking. The French white sausage,   boudin blanc,   is made from  various white meats bound together with milk, eggs, bread crumbs, or flour, while  the black   boudin noir   contains no meat at all: it’s around one-third pork fat, one-  third onions, apples, or chestnuts, and one-third pork blood, which coagulates  during poaching to help provide a solid matrix. Liver sausage is made by cooking a  blend of finely ground liver and fat. Manufacturers often use soy protein and  nonfat milk solids to help thicken and retain moisture.  Emulsified Sausages   Emulsified sausages are a special kind of cooked sausage,  best known in the form of frankfurters or wieners and so called for their presumed  origins in Germany (Frankfurt) or Austria (Wien). Italian mortadella (“bologna”) is  similar. These sausages have a very fine-textured, homogeneous, tender interior,  and a relatively mild flavor. They’re made by combining pork, beef, or poultry with  fat,   salt,   nitrite,   flavorings,   and   usually   additional   water,   and   shearing   the  ingredients together in a large blender until they form a smooth “batter,” which is  similar to an emulsified sauce like mayonnaise (p. 625): the fat is evenly dispersed  in small droplets, which are surrounded and stabilized by fragments of the muscle  cells and by salt-dissolved muscle proteins. The temperature during blending is  critical: if it rises above 60ºF/16ºC in a pork batter, 70ºF/21ºC in beef, the emulsion  will be unstable and leak fat. The batter is then extruded into a casing and cooked  to about 160ºF/70ºC. Heat coagulates the meat proteins and turns the batter into a  cohesive, solid mass from which the casing can be removed. Due to their relatively  high water content, around 50–55%, emulsified sausages are perishable and must  be refrigerated.  Sausage Ingredients: Fat and Casings   The fat for sausage making is generally
pork fat from under the skin of the animal’s back. Pork fat has the advantage of  being relatively neutral in flavor, and back fat in particular has just the right  consistency: hard enough not to melt and separate as the meat is ground or stored  at warm room temperatures, but soft enough that it’s not granular and pasty when  eaten cool. Belly fat is softer than ideal, kidney fat and beef and lamb fat harder;  poultry fats are too soft. In standard nonemulsified sausages, the 30%+ fat content  helps separate the meat fragments and provides tenderness and moistness. The  coarser the meat fragments, the lower the surface area that fat must lubricate, and  so the less fat required for an appealing texture (as little as 15%).  Sausage casings were traditionally various parts of the animal digestive tube.  Today, most “natural” casings are the thin connective-tissue layers of hog or sheep  intestine, stripped of their inner lining and outer muscular layers by heat and  pressure, partly dried and packed in salt until they’re filled. (Beef casings include  some muscle.) There are also manufactured sausage containers made from animal  collagen, plant cellulose, and paper.  Early Sausage Recipes  Lucanians  Pound pepper, cumin, savory, rue, parsley, seasoning, bay berries, and  liquamen   [salted fish sauce], and mix with well-pounded flesh,  grinding both together. Mix in   liquamen,   whole peppercorns, plenty of  fat and pine-nuts, force into an intestine stretched thinly, and hang in  smoke.  — Apicius, first few centuries   CE  Liver Sausage   (Esicium ex Iecore)  Grind pork or other livers after they have boiled a little. Then cut up  pork belly to the amount of liver, and mix with two eggs, sufficient aged  cheese, marjoram, parsley, raisins, and ground spices. When these form  a mass make balls the size of a nut, wrap in caul fat, and fry in a pan  with lard. They require slow and low heat.  — Platina,   De honesta voluptate et valetudine,   1475
Cooking Fresh Sausages   Since their fragmented interior guarantees a certain  kind of tenderness, sausages are often cooked very casually. But they benefit from  being heated as carefully as other fresh meats. Five centuries ago, Platina remarked  on the need to cook liver sausage gently (see box, p. 169), and said that another  sausage was called   mortadella   “because it is surely more pleasant a little raw than  overcooked.” Fresh sausages should be thoroughly cooked to kill microbes, but no  hotter than well-done meat, or 160ºF/70ºC. Gentle cooking prevents the interior  from reaching the boil, at which point the skin will burst and leak moisture and  flavor, and which hardens the texture. Intentionally piercing the skin will release  moisture throughout the cooking, but provides insurance against more disfiguring  splitting toward the end.  Pâtés and Terrines  Most medieval European cookbooks offer several recipes for meat pies, in which  chopped meat and fat are cooked inside a pastry crust or in a well-greased  earthenware pot. Over the centuries, French cooks refined this preparation, while  in other countries it survived in rustic forms. And so England has pasties and  patties,   France   the   pâté   and   the   terrine. These   last   two   terms   are   largely  synonymous, though today “pâté” usually suggests a fairly uniform and fine-  textured mixture based on liver, “terrine” a coarser, often patterned one. Pâtés and  terrines thus span a wonderful range, from coarse, rustic massings of pork innards  and head in the French pâté de campagne, to luxurious layerings of brandy-  scented foie gras and truffles.  Modern pâtés and terrines often contain little fat, but traditional mixes were based  on a meat to fat ratio of around 2 to 1 to give a rich, melt-in-the-mouth  consistency.   Pork   and   veal,   an   immature   meat   with   relatively   little   tough  connective tissue and an abundant producer of gelatin, are the usual main  ingredients. They are ground together with the fat — usually pork for its ideal  consistency — to mix protein and fat intimately. Hand chopping is less likely to  heat the mixture or damage intact fat cells, which would cause more liquid fat to  separate from the mix during cooking. The mix is seasoned more strongly than  many foods both because it’s rich in flavor-binding proteins and fats, and because  it’s generally served cool, which reduces the aroma. The mix is placed in a mold,  covered, and cooked gently in a water bath until the juices run clear and the  internal temperature reaches 160ºF/70ºC. (Terrines of foie gras are often cooked to
a much lower temperature, perhaps 120ºF/55ºC, especially if intact lobes are  layered together; they come out rosy pink.) The proteins have coagulated into a  solid matrix, trapping much of the fat in place. The pâté is then topped with a  weight to compact it, and refrigerated for several days to firm and allow the flavors  to blend. The cooked mixture keeps for about a week.  Pâtés and Terrines: Early Recipes  As these medieval recipes demonstrate, even early pâtés were made in pots  and dishes without the pastry that originally gave them their name.  Pastez de beuf  Take good young beef, and remove all fat. Cut the lean into pieces and  boil, and afterwards take to the pastry cook to be chopped, and fatten  it with beef marrow.  —   Le Ménagier de Paris,   ca. 1390  Pastilli di carne  Take as much lean meat as you want and cut it up fine with small  knives. Mix veal fat and spices into this meat. Wrap in crusts and bake  in an oven…. This can even be made in a well-greased dish without a  crust.  — Maestro Martino, ca. 1450  Preserved Meats  The preservation of meat from biological spoilage has been a major challenge  throughout human history. The earliest methods, which go back at least 4,000  years, were physical and chemical treatments that make meat inhospitable to  microbes. Drying meat in the sun and wind or by the fire removes enough water to  halt bacterial growth. A smoky fire deposits cell-killing chemicals on the meat  surface. Heavy salting — with partly evaporated seawater, or rock salt, or the ashes  of salt-concentrating plants — also draws vital moisture from cells. Moderate
salting permits the growth of a few hardy and harmless microbes that help exclude  harmful ones. Out of these crude methods to stave off spoilage have come some of  our most complex and interesting foods, the dry-cured hams and fermented  sausages.  The Industrial Revolution brought a new approach: preserve meat not by changing  the meat itself, but by controlling its environment. Canning encloses cooked meat  in a sterile container hermetically sealed against the entry of microbes. Mechanical  refrigeration and freezing keep meat cold enough to slow microbial growth or  suspend it altogether. And irradiation of prepackaged meat kills any microbes in  the package while leaving the meat itself relatively unchanged.  Dried Meats: Jerky  Microbes need water to survive and grow, so one simple and ancient preservation  technique has been to dry meat, originally by exposing it to the wind and sun.  Nowadays, meat is dried by briefly salting it to inhibit surface microbes and then  heating it in low-temperature convection ovens to remove at least two-thirds of its  weight and 75% of its moisture (more than 10% moisture may allow   Penicillium  and   Aspergillus   molds to grow). Because its flavor has been concentrated and its  texture is interesting, dried meat remains popular. Modern examples include  American jerky, Latin American   carne seca,   Norwegian   fenalår   and southern African  biltong,   whose textures can range from chewy to brittle. Two refined versions are  Italian   bresaola   and Swiss   Buendnerfleisch,   which are beef salted and sometimes  flavored with wine and herbs before a slow, cool drying period of up to several  months. They’re served in paper-thin slices.  Freeze-Drying   Freeze-drying is the technique originally used by Andean peoples  to make   charqui ; they took advantage of the thin dry air to evaporate moisture  from meat during sunny days and sublimate it from ice crystals during freezing  nights. The result was an uncooked, honeycombed tissue that would readily  reabsorb water during later cooking. In the industrial version, the meat is rapidly  frozen under vacuum, then mildly heated to sublimate its water. Because this kind  of desiccation doesn’t cause cooking and compaction of the tissue, relatively thick  pieces can be dried and reconstituted.
Salted Meats: Hams, Bacon, Corned Beef  Like drying, salting preserves meat by depriving bacteria and molds of water. The  addition of salt — sodium chloride — to meat creates such a high concentration of  dissolved sodium and chloride ions outside the microbes that water inside their  cells is drawn out, salt is drawn in, and their cellular machinery is disrupted. The  microbes either die or slow down drastically. The muscle cells too are partly  dehydrated and absorb salt. Traditional cured meats, made by dry-salting or  brining large cuts for several days, are about 60% moisture and 5–7% salt by  weight. The resulting hams (from pig legs), bacon (from pig sides), corned beef  (“corn” coming from the English word for grains, including salt grains), and similar  products keep uncooked for many months.  Traditional Versions of Cured Pork  Of curing hams: This is the way to cure hams in jars or tubs…. Cover the  bottom of the jar or tub with salt and put in a ham, skin down. Cover  the whole with salt and put another ham on top, and cover this in the  same manner. Be careful that meat does not touch meat. So proceed,  and when you have packed all the hams, cover the top with salt so that  no meat can be seen, and smooth it out even. When the hams have  been in salt five days, take them all out with the salt and repack them,  putting those which were on top at the bottom….  After the twelfth day remove the hams, brush off the salt, and hang  them for two days in the wind. On the third day wipe them off clean  with a sponge and rub them with oil. Then hang them in smoke for two  days, and on the third day rub them with a mixture of vinegar and oil.  Then hang them in the meat house, and neither bats nor worms will  touch them.  — Cato,   On Agriculture , 50   BCE  Bacon, to dry: Cut the Leg with a piece of the Loin (of a young Hog) then  with Saltpeter, in fine Pouder and brown Sugar mix’d together, rub it  well daily for 2 or 3 days, after which salt it well; so will it look red: let it
lye for 6 or 8 Weeks, then hang it up (in a drying-place) to dry.  — William Salmon,  The Family Dictionary: Or, Household Companion , London, 1710  Useful Impurities: Nitrates and Nitrites   Sodium chloride is not the only salt with  an important role in salt-curing. The others were unpredictable mineral impurities  in the rock, sea, and vegetable salts originally used for curing. One of these,  potassium nitrate (KNO 3 ), was discovered during the Middle Ages and named  saltpeter   because it was found as a salt-like crystalline outgrowth on rocks. In the  16th or 17th century, it was found to brighten meat color and improve its flavor,  safety, and storage life. Around 1900, German chemists discovered that during the  cure certain salt-tolerant bacteria transform a small portion of the nitrate into  nitrite (NO 2 ), and that nitrite rather than nitrate is the true active ingredient. Once  this was known, producers could eliminate saltpeter from the curing mixture and  replace it with much smaller doses of pure nitrite. This is now the rule except in the  production of traditional dry-cured hams and bacons, where prolonged ripening  benefits from the ongoing bacterial production of nitrite from nitrate.  We now know that nitrite does several important things for cured meats. It  contributes its own sharp, piquant flavor. It reacts in the meat to form nitric oxide  (NO), which retards the development of rancid flavors in the fat by preemptively  binding to the iron atom in myoglobin, thus preventing the iron from causing fat  oxidation. The same iron binding produces the characteristic bright pink-red color  of cured meat. Finally, nitrite suppresses the growth of various bacteria, most  importantly the spores of the oxygen-intolerant bacterium that causes deadly  botulism.   Clostridium   botulinum   can   grow   inside   sausages   that   have   been  insufficiently or unevenly salted; German scientists first named the poisoning it  causes   Wurstvergiftung,   or sausage disease ( botulus   is Latin for sausage). Nitrite  apparently   inhibits   important   bacterial   enzymes   and   interferes   with   energy  production.  Nitrate and nitrite can react with other food components to form possible cancer-  causing nitrosamines. This risk now appears to be small (p. 125). Nevertheless,  residual nitrate and nitrite in cured meats is limited to 200 parts per million (0.02%)
in the United States, and is usually well below this limit.  The Enigma of Hams Cured Without Nitrite  Though most traditional long-cured hams are treated with saltpeter to  provide a steady supply of nitrite, a few are not. The eminent prosciuttos of  Parma and San Daniele are cured with sea salt only, yet somehow still develop  the characteristic rosy color of nitrite-stabilized myoglobin. Sea salt does  contain nitrate and nitrite impurities, but not enough to affect ham color.  Recently, Japanese scientists found that the stable red pigment of these hams  is not nitrosomyoglobin, and its formation seems associated with the  presence of particular ripening bacteria ( Staphylococcus carnosus   and  caseolyticus ). And it may be that the absence of nitrite is one of the keys to the  exceptional quality of these hams. Nitrite protects meat fats from oxidation  and the development of off-flavors. But fat breakdown is also one of the  sources of desirable ham flavor, and nitrite-free Parma hams have been found  to contain more fruity esters than nitrite-cured Spanish and French hams.  Sublime Hams   The many months that salted meats keep turned out to transform  pig flesh into some of the great foods of the world! First among them are the dry-  cured hams, which go back at least to classical times. The modern versions, which  include   Italian   prosciutto   di   Parma,   Spanish   serrano,   French   Bayonne,   and  American country hams, may be aged for a year or more. Though they can be  cooked, dry-cured hams are at their best when eaten in paper-thin raw slices. With  their vivid, rose-colored translucency, silken texture, and a flavor at once meaty  and fruity, they are to fresh pork what long-aged cheeses are to fresh milk: a  distillation, an expression of the transforming powers of salt, enzymes, and time.  The Effects of Salt   In addition to protecting hams from spoilage as they mature,  salt contributes to their appearance and texture. High salt concentrations cause  the normally tightly bunched protein filaments in the muscle cells to separate into  individual filaments, which are too small to scatter light: so the normally opaque  muscle tissue becomes translucent. The same unbunching also weakens the  muscle fibers, while at the same time dehydration makes the tissue denser and
more concentrated: hence the close but tender texture.  The Alchemy of Dry-Cured Flavor   Some of the muscles’ biochemical machinery  survives intact, in particular the enzymes that break flavorless proteins down into  savory peptides and amino acids, which over the course of months may convert a  third or more of the meat protein to flavor molecules. The concentration of mouth-  filling, meaty glutamic acid rises ten- to twenty-fold, and as in cheese, so much of  the amino acid tyrosine is freed that it may form small white crystals. In addition,  the unsaturated fats in pig muscle break apart and react to form hundreds of  volatile compounds, some of them characteristic of the aroma of melon (a  traditional and chemically fitting accompaniment to ham!), apple, citrus, flowers,  freshly cut grass, and butter. Other compounds react with the products of protein  breakdown to give nutty, caramel flavors normally found only in cooked meats  (concentration compensates for the subcooking temperature). In sum, the flavor of  dry-cured ham is astonishingly complex and evocative.  Modern Wet-Cured Meats   Salted meats continue to be popular even in the age of  refrigeration, when salting is no longer essential. But because we now salt meats  for taste, not to extend storage life, industrial versions are treated with milder  cures, and generally must be refrigerated and/or cooked. And they’re made very  quickly, which means that their flavor is less complex than dry-cured meats.  Industrial bacon is made by injecting brine (typically about 15% salt, 10% sugar)  into the pork side with arrays of fine needles, or else cutting it into slices, then  immersing the slices in a brine for 10 or 15 minutes. In either method the  “maturing” period has shrunk to a few hours, and the bacon is packed the same  day. Hams are injected with brine, then “tumbled” in large rotating drums for a day  to massage the brine evenly through the meat and make it more supple, and  finally pressed into shape, partly or fully cooked, chilled, and sold with no maturing  period. For some boneless “hams,” pork pieces are tumbled with salt to draw out  the muscle protein myosin, which forms a sticky layer that holds the pieces  together. Most corned beef is now injected with brine as well; the briskets never  touch any actual salt grains.  Modern ham and bacon contain more moisture than the dry-cured versions  (sometimes more than the original raw meat!) and about half the salt — 3–4%  instead of 5–7%. Where slices of traditional ham and bacon fry easily and retain  75% of their weight, the wetter modern versions spatter, shrink, and curl as they  give up their water, and retain only a third of their initial weight.
Smoked Meats  Smoke from burning plant materials, usually wood, has helped to preserve food  ever since our ancestors mastered fire. Smoke’s usefulness results from its chemical  complexity (p. 448). It contains many hundreds of compounds, some of which kill  or inhibit the growth of microbes, some of which retard fat oxidation and the  development of rancid flavors, and some of which add an appealing flavor of their  own. Because smoke only affects the surface of food, it has long been used in  conjunction with salting and drying — a happy combination because salted meats  are especially prone to developing rancidity. American country hams and bacons  are examples of smoked salted foods. Because there are now other ways to store  meat, and because some smoke components are known to be health hazards (p.  449), smoke is now used less frequently as a full-strength preservative, and more  often as a lightly applied flavoring.  Hot and Cold Smoking   Meat can be smoked in two different ways. When   hot-  smoked,   the meat is held directly above or in the same enclosure as the wood, and  therefore cooks while it’s smoked. This will give it a more or less firm, dry texture,  depending on the temperature (usually between 130 and 180ºF/55–80ºC) and  time involved, and can kill microbes throughout the meat, not just on the surface.  (Barbecuing is a form of hot smoking; see p. 157.) When it is   cold-smoked,   the meat  is held in an unheated chamber through which smoke is passed from a separate  firebox. The texture of the meat, and any microbes within it, are relatively  unaffected. The cold-smoking chamber may be as low as 32ºF/0ºC but more  usually ranges between 60 and 80ºF/15–25ºC. Smoke vapors are deposited onto  the meat surface as much as seven times faster in hot smoking; however, cold-  smoked meats tend to accumulate higher concentrations of the sweet-spicy  phenolic   components   and   so   may   have   a   finer   flavor.   (They   also   tend   to  accumulate more possible carcinogens.) The humidity of the air also makes a  difference; smoke vapors are deposited most efficiently onto moist surfaces, so  “wet” smoking has a stronger effect in a shorter time.  Fermented Meats: Cured Sausages  Milk is transformed into long-keeping and flavorful cheese by removing some of its  moisture, salting it, and encouraging harmless microbes to grow in and acidify it:  and meat can be be treated in much the same way to the same effect. There are
many different kinds of   sausage,   or re-formed masses of chopped, salted meat (p.  169). Fermented sausages are the most flavorful thanks to bacteria that break  down   bland   proteins   and   fats   into   smaller,   intensely   savory   and   aromatic  molecules.  Fermented sausages probably developed in prehistoric times from the practice of  salting and drying meat scraps to preserve them. When salted scraps are squeezed  together, microbe-laden surfaces end up inside the moist mass, and salt-tolerant  bacteria that can grow without oxygen thrive there. For the most part, these  bacteria turn out to be the same ones that can grow in salty, air-poor cheese:  namely the Lactobacilli and Leuconostocs (and such relatives as the Micrococci,  Pediococci, and Carnobacteria). They produce lactic and acetic acids, which lower  the meat pH from 6 to 4.5–5 and make it even less hospitable to spoilage  microbes. Then, as the sausage slowly dries out with time, the salt and acidity  become more concentrated, and the sausage increasingly resistant to spoilage.  Southern and Northern Styles of Sausage   Fermented sausages come in two  general styles. One is the dry, salty, well-spiced sausage typical of the warm, dry  Mediterranean. Italian salami and Spanish and Portuguese chorizos are 25–35%  water, contain more than 4% salt, and can be stored at room temperature. The  other style is the moister, less salty, usually smoked and/or cooked sausage typical  of northern Europe, whose cool, humid climate made drying difficult. These  “summer” sausages and German cervelats are 40–50% water, around 3.5% salt, and  must be refrigerated. Both can be eaten uncooked.  Making Fermented Sausages   These days, nitrates (Europe) or nitrites (U.S.) to  suppress botulism bacteria are added to the mix of meat, fat, bacterial culture, salt,  and spices, as is some sugar, at least part of which the bacteria transform into lactic  acid. Fermentation lasts from 18 hours to three days, depending on temperature  (60–100ºF/15–38ºC, with dry sausages at the low end) and sausage size, until the  acidity reaches 1%, the pH 4.5–5. High-temperature fermentation tends to produce  volatile   acids   (acetic,   butanoic)   with   a   sharp   aroma,   while   low-temperature  fermentation produces a more complex blend of nutty aldehydes and fruity esters  (the traditional salami flavor). The sausage may then be cooked and/or smoked,  and finally is dried for two to three weeks to the desired final moisture content. A  powdery white coat of harmless molds and yeasts (species of   Penicillium, Candida,  Debaromyces )   may   develop   on   the   casing   during   drying;   these   microbes  contribute to flavor and prevent the growth of spoilage microbes.
Fermented sausages develop a dense, chewy texture thanks to the salt extraction  of the meat proteins, their denaturation by the bacterial acids, and to the general  drying of the meat mass. Their tangy, aromatic flavor comes from the bacterial  acids and volatile molecules, and from fragments of protein and fat generated by  enzymes from both the microbes and the meat.  Confits  In ancient times, cooks from central Asia to western Europe learned that cooked  meat could be preserved by burying it under a thick, airtight seal of fat. Today the  best known version is the southwest French   confit   of goose and duck legs, which  became fashionable in the 19th century on the coattails of foie gras — which may  in turn have been an accidental by-product of cramming geese to get the fat for  unfashionable   farmhouse   confits!   The   French   confit   probably   began   as   a  household method for preserving pork in its own lard through the year following  the autumn slaughter. The confit of goose and duck seems to have been  developed by makers of salted meats around Bayonne in the 18th century, when  local maize production made it economical to force-feed fowl and generate the  necessary fat. In the age of canning and refrigeration, confits are still made as a  convenient, long-keeping ingredient that lends its distinctive flavor to salads,  stews, and soups.  The traditional French confit is made by salting pieces of meat for a day,  sometimes along with herbs and spices, then drying them, immersing them in fat,  and heating very gradually and gently for several hours. The meat, often still pink  or red inside (p. 149), is then drained, placed in a sterilized container over an  additional sprinkling of salt, the fat skimmed from any spoilage-prone meat juices,  reheated, and then poured over the meat. Sealed and stored in a cool place, the  confit keeps for several months, and can be reheated periodically to extend its  useful life.  The small but real risk that botulism bacteria could grow in this low-oxygen  environment is reduced by the second dose of salt, by storage temperatures below  40ºF/4ºC, and by the addition of nitrate or nitrite to the salt. Most modern versions  of the confit are either canned or are refrigerated for safety and made to be eaten  within a few days, so they’re salted mildly, more for flavor and color than for  preservation.
The flavor of a traditional confit is said to improve over the course of several  months. Though the cooking presumably kills bacteria and inactivates all enzymes  in the meat, there will certainly be biochemical changes in the meat over time, and  the fat will oxidize. A slight rancidity is part of the flavor of a traditional confit.  Food Words:   Confit  These days the word   confit   is used loosely to describe just about anything  cooked slowly and gently to a rich, succulent consistency: onions in olive oil,  for example, or shrimp cooked and stored under clarified butter. In fact the  term is a fairly inclusive one. It comes via the French verb   confire , from the  Latin   conficere,   meaning “to do, to produce, to make, to prepare.”   The French  verb was first applied in medieval times to fruits cooked and preserved in  sugar syrup or honey (hence French   confiture   and English   confection ) or in  alcohol. Later it was applied to vegetables pickled in vinegar, olives in oil,  various foods in salt, and meats under fat. The general sense has been to  immerse a food in and often impregnate it with a substance that both flavors  it and preserves it. In modern usage of the term   confit,   the connotations of  immersion, impregnation, flavoring, and slow, deliberate preparation survive,  while the idea of preservation — and the special flavors that develop over  weeks and months — has faded away.  Canned Meats  Around 1800, a French brewer and confectioner named Nicolas Appert discovered  that if he sealed food in a glass container and then heated the container in boiling  water, the food would keep indefinitely without spoiling. This was the beginning of  canning, a form of preservation in which the food is first isolated from air and  external contamination by microbes, and then heated sufficiently to destroy any  microbes already in the food. (Pasteur hadn’t yet proven the existence of microbes;  Appert simply observed that all “ferments” were destroyed in his process.) When  done properly, canning is quite effective: canned meat a century old has been  eaten without harm, if also without much pleasure. The canning of meats is almost
exclusively an industrial process today, in part because it offers the cook little in  the way of desirable flavors or textures.   Object 3
Fish and Shellfish  Fish and shellfish are foods from the earth’s other world, its vast water underworld.  Dry land makes up less than a third of the planet’s surface, and it’s a tissue-thin  home compared to the oceans, whose floor plunges as much as 7 miles below the  waves. The oceans are voluminous and ancient, the “primordial soup” in which all  life began, and in which the human imagination has found rich inspiration for  myths of destruction and creation, of metamorphosis and rebirth. The creatures  that live in this cold, dark, dense, airless place are unmatched among our food  animals in their variety and their strangeness.  Our species has long nourished itself on fish and shellfish, and it built nations on  them as well. The world’s coastlines are dotted with massive piles of oyster and  mussel shells that commemorate feasts going back 300,000 years. By 40,000 years  ago the hunters of prehistoric Europe were carving salmon images and making the  first hooks to catch river fish; and not long afterward, they ventured onto the  ocean in boats. From the late Middle Ages on, the seagoing nations of Europe and  Scandinavia exploited the Atlantic’s abundant stocks of cod and herring, drying  and salting them into commodities that were the foundation of their modern  prosperity.  Five hundred years later, at the beginning of the 21st century, the oceans’  productivity is giving out. It has been exhausted by feeding a tenfold increase in  the human population, and by constant advances in fishing technology and  efficiency. With the help of faster and larger ships, sonar to see into the depths,  miles-long nets and lines, and the mechanization of all aspects of the harvest,  we’ve managed to fish many important food species to the verge of commercial  extinction. Formerly common fish — cod and herring, Atlantic salmon and  swordfish and sole, sturgeon and shark — are increasingly rare. Others — orange  roughy, Chilean sea bass, monkfish — come and go from the market, temporarily  abundant until they too are overfished.  The decline in the populations of wild fish has encouraged the widespread revival  and modernization of aquaculture. Fish farms are now our nearly exclusive source  for freshwater fish, for Atlantic salmon, and for mussels. Many of these operations
effectively spare wild populations, but others further deplete them and cause  environmental damage of their own. It takes some effort these days to find and  choose fish and shellfish that have been produced in environmentally responsible,  sustainable ways.  Yet it’s a good time to be eating from the waters. More fish of excellent quality are  available more widely than ever before, and they come from all over the globe,  offering the opportunity to discover new ingredients and new pleasures. At the  same time, their variety and variability make it challenging to choose and prepare  them well. Fish and shellfish are more fragile and less predictable than ordinary  meats. This chapter will take a close look at their special nature, and how they’re  best handled and prepared.  Brillat-Savarin on Fish  Fish are an endless source of meditation and astonishment. The varied  forms of these strange creatures, their diverse means of existence, the  influence upon this of the places in which they must live and breathe  and move about….  —   Physiology of Taste , 1825  Fisheries and Aquaculture  Of all our foods, fish and shellfish are the only ones that we still harvest in  significant quantities from the wild. The history of the world’s fisheries is the saga  of human ingenuity, bravery, hunger, and wastefulness evolving into a maw that  now swallows much of the oceans’ tremendous productivity. In 1883, the eminent  biologist T. H. Huxley expressed his belief that “the cod fishery, the herring fishery,  the pilchard fishery, the mackerel fishery, and probably all the great sea fisheries  are inexhaustible; that is to say that nothing we do seriously affects the numbers of  fish.” Just over a century later, cod and herring stocks on both sides of the North  Atlantic have collapsed, many other fish are in decline, and the U.N. Food and  Agriculture Organization estimates that we are harvesting two-thirds of the major
commercial fish in the world at or beyond the level at which they can sustain  themselves.  In addition to dangerously depleting its target fish populations, modern fishing  causes collateral damage to other species, the “bycatch” of undiscriminating nets  and lines that is simply discarded, and it can damage ocean-bottom habitats.  Fishing is also an unpredictable, dangerous job, subject to the uncertainties of  weather and the hazards of working at sea with heavy equipment. To this highly  problematic system of production, there is an increasingly important alternative:  aquaculture, or fish farming, which in many parts of the world goes back  thousands of years. Today in the United States, all of the rainbow trout and nearly  all of the catfish sold are farmed on land in various kinds of ponds and tanks.  Norway pioneered the ocean farming of Atlantic salmon in large offshore pens in  the 1960s; and today more than a third of the salmon eaten in the world is farmed  in Europe and North and South America. About a third of the world warm-water  shrimp harvest is cultured, mainly in Asia. In all, about 70 species are now farmed  worldwide.  Advantages and Drawbacks of Aquaculture  There are several distinct advantages to aquaculture. Above all, it allows the  producer unequaled control over the condition of the fish and the circumstances  of the harvest, both of which can result in better quality in the market. Farmed fish  can be carefully selected for rapid growth and other desirable characteristics, and  raised to a uniform and ideal stage for eating. By adjusting water temperature and  flow rate and light levels, fish can be induced to grow far more rapidly than in the  wild, and a balance can be struck between energy consumption and muscle-  toning exercise. Farmed fish are often fattier and so more succulent. They can be  slaughtered without suffering the stress and physical damage of being hooked,  netted, or dumped en masse on deck; and they can be processed and chilled  immediately and cleanly, thus prolonging their period of maximum quality.  However, aquaculture is not a perfect solution to the problems of ocean fishing,  and has itself created a number of serious problems. Farming in offshore pens  contaminates surrounding waters with wastes, antibiotics, and unconsumed food,  and allows genetically uniform fish to escape and dilute the diversity of already  endangered wild populations. The feed for carnivorous and scavenger species
(salmon, shrimp) is mainly protein-rich fish meal, so some aquaculture operations  actually consume wild fish rather than sparing them. And very recent studies have  found that some environmental toxins (PCBs, p. 184) become concentrated in fish  meal and are deposited in the flesh of farmed salmon.  The Oceans’ Silver Streams  Fish…may seem a mean and a base commodity; yet who will but truly  take the pains and consider the sequel, I think will allow it well worth  the labour…. The poor Hollanders chiefly by fishing at a great charge  and labour in all weathers in the open sea,…are made so mighty,  strong, and rich, as no state but Venice of twice their magnitude is so  well furnished, with so many fair cities, goodly towns, strong  fortresses…. The sea [is] the source of those silver streams of all their  virtue, which hath made them now the very miracle of industry, the  only pattern of perfection for these affairs…  — Capt. John Smith,   The Generall Historie of Virginia, New England,  and the Summer Isles,   London, 1624  A less serious problem, but one that makes a difference in the kitchen, is that the  combination of limited water flow, limited exercise, and artificial feeds can affect  the texture and flavor of farmed fish. In taste tests, farmed trout, salmon, and  catfish are perceived to be blander and softer than their wild counterparts.  Modern aquaculture is still young, and ongoing research and regulation will  certainly   solve   some   of   these   problems.   In   the   meantime,   the   most  environmentally benign products of aquaculture are freshwater fish and a few  saltwater   fish   (sturgeon,   turbot)   farmed   on   land,   and   molluscs   farmed   on  seacoasts. Concerned cooks and consumers can get up-to-date information about  the health of fisheries and aquacultural practices from a number of public interest  groups, including the Monterey Bay Aquarium in California.
Farmed Fish and Shellfish  These are some commonly available fish and shellfish that are being farmed  on a commercial scale at the beginning of the 21st century.  Freshwater Fish   Saltwater Fish   Molluscs   Crustaceans  Carp  Tilapia  Catfish  Trout (rainbow)  Nile perch  Eel  Striped bass  (hybrid)  Salmon  Sea Bass  Sturgeon  Trout  (steelhead)  Char  Turbot  Mahimahi  Milkfish  Yellowtail  Amberjack  Breams  Fugu  Tuna  Abalone  Mussel  Oyster  Clam  Scallop  Shrimp  Crayfish  Seafood and Health  Fish   is   good   for   us:   this   belief   is   one   important   reason   for   the   growing  consumption of seafood in the developed world. There is indeed good evidence  that fish oils can contribute significantly to our long-term health. On the other  hand, of all our foods, fish and shellfish are the source of the broadest range of  immediate health hazards, from bacteria and viruses to parasites, pollutants, and  strange toxins. Cooks and consumers should be aware of these hazards, and of  how to minimize them. The simplest rule is to buy from knowledgeable seafood  specialists whose stock turns over quickly, and to cook fish and shellfish promptly  and thoroughly. Raw and lightly cooked preparations are delicious but carry the  risk of several kinds of food-borne disease. They are best indulged in at established
restaurants that have access to the best fish and the expertise to prepare it.  Health Benefits  Like meats, fish and shellfish are good sources of protein, the B vitamins, and  various minerals. Iodine and calcium are special strengths. Many fish are very lean,  and so offer these nutrients along with relatively few calories. But the fat of ocean  fish turns out to be especially valuable in its own right. Like other fats that are  liquid at room temperature, fish fats are usually referred to as “oils.”  The Benefits of Fish Oils   As we’ll see (p. 189), life in cold water has endowed sea  creatures with fats rich in unusual, highly unsaturated   omega-3 fatty acids.   (The  name means that the first kink in the long chain of carbon atoms is at the third link  from the end; see p. 801.) The human body can’t make these fatty acids very  efficiently from other fatty acids, so our diet supplies most of them. A growing  body of evidence indicates that they happen to have a number of beneficial  influences on our metabolism.  One benefit is quite direct, the others indirect. Omega-3 fatty acids are essential to  the development and function of the brain and the retina, and it appears that an  abundance in our diet helps ensure the health of the central nervous system in  infancy and throughout life. But the body also transforms omega-3 fatty acids into  a special set of calming immune-system signals (eicosanoids). The immune system  responds to various kinds of injuries by generating an inflammation, which kills  cells in the vicinity of the injury in preparation for repairing it. But some  inflammations can become self-perpetuating, and do more harm than good: most  importantly, they can damage arteries and contribute to heart disease, and they  can contribute to the development of some cancers. A diet rich in omega-3 fatty  acids helps limit the inflammatory response, and thus lowers the incidence of  heart disease and cancer. By reducing the body’s readiness to form blood clots, it  also lowers the incidence of stroke. And it lowers the artery-damaging form of  blood cholesterol.  In sum, it looks as though a moderate and regular consumption of fatty ocean fish  is good for us in several ways. Fish obtain their omega-3 fatty acids directly or  indirectly from tiny oceanic plants called phytoplankton. Farmed fish generally  have lower levels of the omega-3s in their formulated feed, and so less in their  meat. Freshwater fish don’t have access to the oceanic plankton, and so provide
negligible amounts of omega-3s. However, all fish contain low amounts of  cholesterol-raising saturated fats, so to the extent that they replace meat in the  diet, they lower artery-damaging blood cholesterol and reduce the risk of heart  disease.  Health Hazards  There are three general kinds of hazardous materials that contaminate fish and  shellfish: industrial toxins, biological toxins, and disease-causing microbes and  parasites.  Toxic Metals and Pollutants   Because rain washes chemical pollution from the air  to the ground, and rain and irrigation wash it from the ground, almost every kind  of chemical produced on the planet ends up in the rivers and oceans, where they  can be accumulated by fish and shellfish. Of the potentially hazardous substances  found   in   fish,   the   most   significant   are   heavy   metals   and   organic   (carbon-  containing) pollutants, preeminently dioxins and polychlorinated biphenyls, or  PCBs. The heavy metals, including mercury, lead, cadmium, and copper, interfere  with oxygen absorption and the transmission of signals in the nervous system;  they’re known to cause brain damage in humans. Organic pollutants cause liver  damage, cancer, and hormonal disturbances in laboratory animals, and they  accumulate in body fat. Fatty coho salmon and trout in the Great Lakes carry such  high levels of these pollutants that government agencies advise against eating  them.  Cooking   doesn’t   eliminate   chemical   toxins,   and   there’s   no   direct   way   for  consumers to know whether fish contain unhealthy levels of them. In general, they  concentrate in filter-feeding shellfish like oysters, which strain suspended particles  from large volumes of water, and in large predatory fish at the top of the food  chain, which are long-lived and eat other creatures that accumulate toxins. In  recent years, common ocean fish have been found to contain so much mercury  that the U.S. Food and Drug Administration advises children and pregnant women  not to eat any swordfish, shark, tilefish, and king mackerel, and to limit their overall  fish consumption to 12 ounces/335 grams per week. Even tuna, currently the most  popular seafood in the United States after shrimp, may join the list of fish that are  best eaten only occasionally. The fish least likely to accumulate mercury and other  toxins are smaller, short-lived fish from the open ocean and from farms with a
controlled water supply. They include Pacific salmon and soles, common mackerel,  sardines, and farmed trout, striped bass, catfish, and tilapia. Sport fishing in  freshwater or near large coastal cities is more likely to land an unwholesome catch  contaminated by runoff or industrial discharge.  Fat Contents of Common Fish  Low-Fat Fish (0.5–3%)  Moderately Fatty  Fish(3–7%)   High-Fat Fish (8–20%)  Cod   Anchovy   Arctic char  Flounder   Bluefish   Carp  Halibut   Catfish   Chilean sea bass  (Patagonian toothfish) Monkfish   Salmon: pink,  coho  Rockfish   Shark   Eel  Skate   Smelt   Herring  Snapper   Sole: Dover   Mackerel  Tuna: bigeye, yellowfin,  skipjack  Striped bass   Pompano  Sturgeon   Sablefish  Turbot   Swordfish   Salmon: Atlantic, king,  sockeye Tilapia  Escolar*   Trout   Shad  Orange roughy*   Tuna: bluefin,  albacore  Ruvettus/walu*   Whitefish  *These fish contain oil-like wax esters (p. 187) that the human body can’t  digest; they therefore seem rich but are really low-fat fish.  Infectious and Toxin-Producing Microbes   Seafoods carry about the same risk of  bacterial infections and poisonings as other meats (p. 125). The riskiest seafoods
are raw or undercooked shellfish, particularly bivalves, which trap bacteria and  viruses as they filter the water for food, and which we eat digestive tract and all,  sometimes raw. As early as the 19th century, public health officials connected  outbreaks of cholera and typhoid fever with shellfish from polluted waters.  Government monitoring of water quality and regulation of shellfish harvest and  sales have greatly reduced these problems in many countries. And scrupulous  restaurant OWNERs make sure to buy shellfish for the summer raw bar from  monitored sources, or from less risky cold-water sources. But lovers of raw or lightly  cooked seafood should be aware of the possibility of infection.  As a general rule, infections by bacteria and parasites can be prevented by cooking  seafood to a minimum of 140ºF/60ºC. Temperatures above 185ºF/82ºC are required  to eliminate some viruses. Some chemical toxins produced by microbes survive  cooking, and can cause food poisoning even though the microbes themselves are  destroyed.  Among the most important microbes in fish and shellfish are the following:  •   Vibrio   bacteria, natural inhabitants of estuary waters that thrive in warm  summer months. One species causes cholera, another a milder diarrheal  disease, and a third ( V. vulnificus ), usually contracted from raw oysters and  the deadliest of the seafood-related diseases, causes high fever, a drop in  blood pressure, and damage to skin and flesh, and kills more than half of its  victims.  •   Botulism bacteria, which grow in the digestive system of unchilled fish and  produce a deadly nerve toxin. Most cases of fish-borne botulism are caused  by improperly cold-smoked, salt-cured, or fermented products.  •   Intestinal viruses, the “Norwalk” viruses, which attack the lining of the small  intestine and cause vomiting and diarrhea.  •   Hepatitis viruses A and E, which can cause long-lasting liver damage.  Scombroid Poisoning   Scombroid poisoning is unusual in that it is caused by a  number of otherwise harmless microbes when they grow on insufficiently chilled  mackerels of the genus   Scomber   and other similarly active swimmers, including  tuna, mahimahi, bluefish, herring, sardine, and anchovy. Within half an hour of  eating one of these contaminated fish, even fully cooked, the victim suffers from  temporary headache, rash, itching, nausea, and diarrhea. The symptoms are  apparently caused by a number of toxins including histamine, a substance that our
cells use to signal each other in response to damage; antihistamine drugs give  some relief.  Shellfish and Ciguatera Poisonings   Fish and shellfish share the waters with many  thousands of animal and plant species, some of which engage in nasty chemical  warfare   with   each   other.   At   least   60   species   of   one-celled   algae   called  dinoflagellates produce defensive toxins that also poison the human digestive and  nervous systems. Several of these toxins can kill.  We don’t consume dinoflagellates directly, but we do eat animals that eat them.  Bivalve filter feeders — mussels, clams, scallops, oysters — concentrate algal toxins  in their gills and/or digestive organs, and then transmit the poisons to other  shellfish   —   usually   crabs   and   whelks   —   or   to   humans.   Accordingly,   most  dinoflagellate poisonings are called “shellfish poisonings.” Many countries now  routinely monitor waters for the algae and shellfish for the toxins, so the greatest  risk is from shellfish gathered privately.  There are several distinct types of shellfish poisoning, each caused by a different  toxin and each with somewhat different symptoms (see box below), though all but  one are marked by tingling, numbness, and weakness within minutes to hours  after eating. Dinoflagellate toxins are not destroyed by ordinary cooking, and some  actually become more toxic when heated. Suspect shellfish should therefore be  avoided altogether.  Finfish generally don’t accumulate toxins from algae. The exceptions are a group of  tropical reef fish — barracuda, groupers, jacks, king mackerel, mahimahi, mullets,  porgies, snappers, wahoo — that prey on an algae-eating snail ( cigua ) and can  cause ciguatera poisoning.  Parasites   Parasites are not bacteria or viruses: they’re animals, from single-celled  protozoa to large worms, that take up residence in one or more animal “hosts” and  use them for both shelter and nourishment during parts of their life cycle. There  are more than 50 that can be transmitted to people who eat fish raw or  undercooked, a handful of which are relatively common, and may require surgery  to remove. Thanks to their more complex biological organization, parasites are  sensitive to freezing (bacteria generally aren’t). So there’s a simple rule for  eliminating parasites in fish and shellfish: either cook the food to a minimum of  140ºF/60ºC, or prefreeze it. The U.S. FDA recommends freezing at –31ºF/–35ºC for  15 hours, or –10ºF/–23ºC for seven days, treatments that are not feasible in home
freezers, which seldom dip below 0ºF.  Poisonings Caused by Toxic Algae  Type of  Poisoning   Usual Regions   Usual Sources   Toxins  Diarrhetic  shellfish  poisoning  Japan, Europe,  Canada  Mussels, scallops   Okadaic acid  Amnesic shellfish  poisoning  U.S. Pacific coast,  New England  Mussels, clams,  Dungeness crab  Domoic acid  Neurotoxic  shellfish  poisoning  Gulf of Mexico,  Florida  Clams, oysters   Brevetoxins  Paralytic shellfish  poisoning  U.S. Pacific coast,  New England  Clams, mussels,  oysters, scallops,  cockles  Saxitoxins  Ciguatera  poisoning  Caribbean, Hawaii,  South Pacific  Barracuda, grouper,  snapper, other reef  fish  Ciguatoxins  Anisakid and Cod Worms   These species of   Anisakis   and   Pseudoterranova   can be an  inch/2.5 centimeters or more long, with a diameter of a few human hairs. Both  often cause only a harmless tingling in the throat, but they sometimes invade the  lining of the stomach or small intestine and cause pain, nausea, and diarrhea.  They’re commonly found in herring, mackerel, cod, halibut, salmon, rockfish, and  squid, and can be contracted from sushi or lightly marinated, salted, or cold-  smoked preparations. Farmed salmon are much less likely to be infected than wild  salmon.  Tapeworms and Flukes   Larvae of the tapeworm   Diphyllobothrium latum,   which  can grow in the human intestine to as long as 27 feet/9 meters, are found in  freshwater fish of temperate regions worldwide. Notable among these is the
whitefish, which caused many infections when home cooks made the traditional  Jewish dish gefilte fish and tasted the raw mix to correct the seasoning.  More serious hazards are a number of flukes, or flatworms, which are carried by  fresh- and brackish-water crayfish, crabs, and fish. They damage the human liver  and lungs after being consumed in such live Asian delicacies as “jumping salad”  and “drunken crabs.”  Potential   Carcinogens   Formed   During   Fish   Preparation   Certain   cooking  processes transform the proteins and related molecules in meat and fish into  highly   reactive   products   that   damage   DNA   and   may   thereby   initiate   the  development of cancers (p. 124). So the rule for cooking meat also holds for  cooking fish: to minimize the creation of potential carcinogens, steam, braise, and  poach fish rather than grilling, broiling, or frying it. If you do use high, dry heat,  then consider applying a marinade, whose moisture, acidity, and other chemical  qualities reduce carcinogen production.  Life in Water and the Special Nature of Fish  As a home for living things, the earth’s waters are a world apart. The house rules  are very different than they are for our cattle and pigs and chickens. The  adaptations of fish and shellfish to life in water are the source of their distinctive  qualities as foods.  The Paleness and Tenderness of Fish Flesh  Fish owe their small, light bones, delicate connective tissue, and large, pale muscle  masses to the fact that water is much denser than air. Fish can attain a neutral  buoyancy — can be almost weightless — simply by storing some lighter-than-  water oils or gas in their bodies. This means that they don’t need the heavy  skeletons or the tough connective tissues that land animals have developed in  order to support themselves against the force of gravity.  The paleness of fish flesh results from water’s buoyancy and its resistance to  movement. Continuous cruising requires long-term stamina and is therefore  performed by slow-twitch red fibers, well supplied with the oxygen-storing  pigment myoglobin and fat for fuel (p. 132). Since cruising in buoyant water is  relatively effortless, fish devote between a tenth and a third of their muscle to that
task, usually a thin dark layer just under the skin. But water’s resistance to  movement increases exponentially with the fish’s speed. This means that fish must  develop very high power very quickly when accelerating. And so they devote most  of their muscle mass to an emergency powerpack of fast-twitch white cells that are  used only for occasional bursts of rapid movement.  In addition to red and white muscle fibers, fish in the tuna family and some others  have   intermediate “pink” fibers,   which   are   white   fibers   modified   for   more  continuous work with oxygen-storing pigments.  A Health Inconvenience:   Waxy Fish  There’s an unusual digestive consequence to eating the fish called escolar and  walu ( Lepidocybium flavobrunneum   and   Ruvettus pretiotus ). They, and to a  lesser extent the orange roughy, accumulate substances called “wax esters,”  which are an oil-like combination of a long-chain fatty acid and a long-chain  alcohol. Humans lack the digestive enzymes necessary to break these  molecules into their smaller, absorbable parts. The wax esters therefore pass  intact and oily from the small intestine into the colon, where a sufficient  quantity will cause diarrhea. Restaurants are the best place to experience  these luscious fish — the flesh is as much as 20% calorie-free “oil” — because  they usually limit the serving size to a tolerable amount.  The Flavor of Fish and Shellfish  The flavors of ocean and freshwater creatures are very different. Because ocean fish  breathe and swallow salty water, they had to develop a way of maintaining their  body fluids at the right concentration of dissolved substances. Water in the open  ocean is about 3% salt by weight, while the optimum level of dissolved minerals  inside animal cells, sodium chloride included, is less than 1%. Most ocean creatures  balance the saltiness of seawater by filling their cells with amino acids and their  relatives the amines. The amino acid glycine is sweet; glutamic acid in the form of  monosodium glutamate is savory and mouthfilling. Shellfish are especially rich in  these and other tasty amino acids. Finfish contain some, but also rely on a largely
tasteless amine called TMAO (trimethylamine oxide). And sharks, skates, and rays  use a different substance: slightly salty and bitter urea, which is what animals  generally turn protein waste into in order to excrete it. The problem with TMAO  and urea is that once the fish are killed, bacteria and fish enzymes convert the  former into stinky TMA (trimethylamine) and the latter into kitchen-cleanser  ammonia. They’re thus responsible for the powerfully bad smell of old fish.  Fish muscle tissues, shown in cross-section. Below left: Most fish swim intermittently,  so their muscle mass consists mainly of fast white fibers, with isolated regions of slow  red fibers. Center: Tuna swim more continuously and contain larger masses of dark  fibers, while even their white fibers contain some myoglobin. Right: Soles, halibuts,  and other bottom-hugging flatfish swim on their side.  Freshwater fish are a different story. Their environment is actually less salty than  their cells, so they have no need to accumulate amino acids, amines, or urea. Their  flesh is therefore relatively mild, both when it’s fresh and when it’s old.  The Healthfulness of Fish Oils  Why should fish and not Angus steers provide the highly unsaturated fats that turn  out to be good for us? Because oceanic waters are colder than pastures and barns,  and most fish are cold-blooded. Throw a beefsteak in the ocean and it congeals; its  cells are designed to operate at the animal’s usual body temperature, around  100ºF/40ºC. The cell membranes and energy stores of ocean fish and the plankton
they eat must remain fluid and workable at temperatures that approach 32ºF/0ºC.  Their fatty acids are therefore very long and irregular in structure (p. 801), and  don’t solidify into orderly crystals until the temperature gets very low indeed.  The Perishability of Fish and Shellfish  The cold aquatic environment is also responsible for the notorious tendency of fish  and shellfish to spoil faster than other meats. The cold has two different effects.  First, it requires fish to rely on the highly unsaturated fatty acids that remain fluid  at low temperatures: and these molecules are highly susceptible to being broken  by oxygen into stale-smelling, cardboardy fragments. More importantly, cold water  requires fish to have enzymes that work well in the cold, and the bacteria that live  in and on the fish also thrive at low temperatures. The enzymes and bacteria  typical of our warm-blooded meat animals normally work at 100ºF/40ºC, and are  slowed to a crawl in a refrigerator at 40ºF/5ºC. But the same refrigerator feels  perfectly balmy to deep-water fish enzymes and spoilage bacteria. And among  fishes, cold-water species, especially fatty ones, spoil faster than tropical ones.  Where refrigerated beef will keep and even improve for weeks, mackerel and  herring remain in good condition on ice for only five days, cod and salmon for  eight, trout for 15, carp and tilapia (a freshwater African native) for 20 days.  The Sensitivity and Fragility of Fish in the Pan  Most fish pose a double challenge in the kitchen. They are more easily overcooked  to a dry fibrousness than ordinary meats. And even when they’re perfectly done,  their flesh is very fragile and tends to fall apart when moved from pan or grill to  plate. The sensitivity of fish to heat is related to their perishability: muscle fibers  that are specialized to work well in the cold not only spoil at lower temperatures,  they become cooked at lower temperatures. The muscle proteins of ocean fish  begin to unfold and coagulate at room temperature!  Though overcooked fish gets dry, it never gets tough. The fragility of cooked fish  results from its relatively small amounts connective-tissue collagen, and from the  low temperature at which that collagen is dissolved into gelatin.
The Unpredictability of Fish Quality  The quality of many fish and shellfish can vary drastically from season to season.  This is because they live out life cycles that typically include one phase during  which they grow and mature, accumulating energy reserves and reaching their  peak of culinary quality, and a subsequent phase during which they expend those  reserves to migrate and create masses of eggs or sperm for the next generation.  And most fish don’t store their reserves in layers of fat, as land animals do. Instead  they use the proteins of their muscle mass as their energy pack. During migrations  and spawning, they accumulate protein-digesting enzymes in their muscle and  literally transform their own flesh into the next generation. Then and afterward,  their muscle is meager and spent, and makes a spongy, mushy dish.  Because different fish have different cycles, and can be in different phases  depending on the part of the world in which they’ve been caught, it’s often hard to  know whether a given wild fish in the market is at its prime.  The Anatomy and Qualities of Fish  Fish and shellfish have many things in common, but anatomy is not one of them.  Fish are vertebrates, animals with backbones; shellfish are boneless invertebrates.  Their muscles and organs are organized differently, and as a result they can have  very different textures. The anatomy and special qualities of shellfish are described  separately, beginning on p. 218.  Fish Anatomy  For about 400 million years, beginning well before reptiles or birds or mammals  had even made an appearance, fish have had the same basic body plan: a  streamlined bullet shape that minimizes the water’s resistance to their movement.  There are exceptions, but most fish can be thought of as sheets of muscle tissue  anchored with connective tissue and the backbone to a propulsive tail. The  animals push water behind them, developing thrust by undulations of the whole  body and flexing of the tail.  Skin and Scales   Fish skin consists of two layers, a thin outer epidermis and a  thicker underlying dermis. A variety of gland cells in the epidermis secrete  protective chemicals, the most evident of which is mucus, a proteinaceous
substance much like egg white. The skin is often richer than the flesh, averaging 5–  10% fat. The thick dermis layer of the skin is especially rich inconnective tissue. It’s  generally about one-third collagen by weight, and therefore can contribute much  more thickening gelatin to stocks and stews than the fish’s flesh (0.3–3% collagen)  or bones. Moist heating will turn the skin into a slick gelatinous sheet, while frying  or grilling enough to desiccate it will make it crisp.  Scales are another evident form of protection for the fish skin. They are made up of  the same hard, tough calcareous minerals as teeth, and are removed by scraping  against their grain with a knife blade.  Bones   The main skeleton of a small or moderate-size fish, consisting of the  backbone and attached rib cage, can often be separated from the meat in one  piece. However, there are usually also bones projecting into the fins, and fish in the  herring, salmon, and other families have small “floating” or “pin” bones unattached  to the main skeleton, which help stiffen some of the connective-tissue sheets and  direct the muscular forces along them. Because fish bones are smaller, lighter, and  less mineralized with calcium than land-animal bones, and because their collagen  is less tough, they can be softened and even dissolved by a relatively short period  near the boil (hence the high calcium content of canned salmon). Fish skeletons  are even eaten on their own: in Catalonia, Japan, and India they’re deep-fried until  crunchy.  Fish Innards   The innards of fish and shellfish offer their own special pleasures. Fish  eggs are described below (p. 239). Many fish livers are prized, including those of  the goatfish (“red mullet”), monkfish, mackerel, ray, and cod, as is the comparable  organ in crustaceans, the hepatopancreas (p. 219). The “tongues” of cod and carp  are actually throat muscles and associated connective tissue that softens with long  cooking. Fish heads can be 20% fatty material and are stuffed and slow-cooked  until the bones soften. And then there are “sounds,” or swim bladders, balloons of  connective tissue that such fish as cod, carp, catfish, and sturgeon fill with air to  adjust their buoyancy. In Asia, fish sounds are dried, fried until they puff up, and  slowly cooked in a savory sauce.  Fish Muscle and its Delicate Texture  Fish have a more delicate texture than the flesh of our land animals. The reasons  for this are the layered structure of fish muscle, and the sparseness and weakness
of fish connective tissue.  Muscle Structure   In land animals, individual muscles and muscle fibers can be  quite long, on the order of several inches, and the muscles taper down at the ends  into a tough tendon that connects them to bone. In fish, by contrast, muscle fibers  are arranged in sheets a fraction of an inch thick (“myotomes”), and each short  fiber merges into very thin layers of connective tissue (“myosepta”), which are a  loose mesh of collagen fibers that run from the backbone to the skin. The muscle  sheets are folded and nested in complex W-like shapes that apparently orient the  fibers for greatest efficiency of force transmission to the backbone. There are about  50 muscle sheets or “flakes” along the length of a cod.  Connective Tissue   Fish connective tissue is weak because its collagen contains  less structure-reinforcing amino acids than beef collagen does, and because the  muscle tissue also serves as an energy store that’s repeatedly built up and broken  down, whereas in land animals it is progressively reinforced with age. Meat  collagen is tough and must be cooked for some time near the boil to be dissolved  into gelatin, but in most fish it dissolves at 120 or 130ºF/50–55ºC, at which point  the muscle layers separate into distinct flakes.  Succulence from Gelatin and Fat   Both gelatin and fat can contribute an  impression of moistness to fish texture. Fish with little collagen — trout, bass —  seem drier when cooked than those with more — halibut, shark. Because the  motion for steady swimming comes mostly from the back end of the fish, the tail  region contains more connective tissue than the head end, and seems more  succulent. Red muscle fibers are thinner than white fibers and require more  connective tissue to join them with each other, so dark meat has a noticeably finer,  more gelatinous texture.  The fat content of fish muscle runs a tremendous range, from 0.5% in cod and  other white fish to 20% in well-fed herring and their relatives (p. 184). Fat storage  cells are found primarily in a distinct layer under the skin, and then in the visible  sheets of connective tissue that separate the myotomes. Within a given fish, the  belly region is usually the fattiest, while muscle segments get progressively leaner  toward the back and tail. A center-cut salmon steak may have twice the fat content  of a slice from the tail.  Softness   Certain conditions can lead to fish flesh becoming unpleasantly soft.  When fish flesh is depleted by migration or by spawning, their sparse muscle
proteins bond to each other only very loosely, and the overall texture is soft and  flabby. In extreme cases, such as “sloppy” cod or “jellied” sole, the muscle proteins  are so tenuously bonded that the muscle seems almost liquefied. Some fish come  out mushy when thawed after frozen storage, because freezing disrupts the cells’  compartments and liberates enzymes that then attack the muscle fibers. And  enzyme activity during cooking can turn firm fish mushy in the pan; see p. 211.  Fish anatomy. Unlike the muscles of land animals (p. 120), fish muscles are arranged in  layers of short fibers, and organized and separated by sheets of connective tissue that  are thin and delicate.  Fish Flavor  The flavor of fish may well be the most variable and changeable among our basic  foods. It depends on the kind of fish, the salinity of its home waters, the food it  eats, and the way it is harvested and handled.  Fish Taste   In general, seafood is more full-tasting than meats or freshwater fish,  because ocean creatures accumulate amino acids to counterbalance the salinity of  seawater (p. 188). The flesh of ocean fish generally contains about the same  amount of salty sodium as beef or trout, but three to ten times more free amino  acids, notably sweet glycine and savory glutamate. Shellfish, sharks and rays, and  members of the herring and mackerel family are especially rich in these amino  acids. Because the salt content of seawater varies substantially — it’s high in the
open ocean, lower near river mouths — the amino-acid content and therefore  taste intensity of fish varies according to the waters they’re caught in.  An additional element of fish taste is contributed indirectly by the energy-carrying  compound ATP (adenosine triphosphate). When a cell extracts energy from ATP, it  is transformed into a series of smaller molecules, one of which, IMP (inosine  monophosphate), has a savory taste similar to that of glutamate. However, IMP is a  transient substance. So the savoriness of fish increases for some time after its  death as IMP levels rise, then declines again as IMP disappears.  Fish Aroma  Fresh and Plant-like   Few of us get the chance to enjoy the experience, but very  fresh fish smell surprisingly like crushed plant leaves! The fatty materials of both  plants and fish are highly unsaturated, and both leaves and fish skin have enzymes  (lipoxygenases) that break these large smellless molecules down into the same  small, aromatic fragments. Nearly all fish emit fragments (8 carbon atoms long)  that have a heavy green, geranium-leaf, slightly metallic smell. Freshwater fish also  produce fragments that are typical of freshly cut grass (6 carbons), and earthy  fragments also found in mushrooms (8 carbons). Some freshwater and migratory  species, especially the smelts, produce fragments characteristic of melons and  cucumbers (9 carbons).  Smell of the Seacoast   Ocean fish often have an additional, characteristic aroma of  the seacoast. This ocean aroma appears to be provided by compounds called  bromophenols, which are synthesized by algae and some primitive animals from  bromine, an abundant element in seawater. Bromophenols are propelled into the  seacoast air by wave action, where we smell them directly. Fish also accumulate  them, either by eating algae or by eating algae eaters, and the fish can thus remind  us of the sea air. Farmed saltwater fish lack the oceanic aroma unless their artificial  feed is supplemented with bromophenols.  Muddiness   Freshwater fish sometimes carry an unpleasant muddy aroma. It’s most  often encountered in bottom-feeding fish, especially catfish and carp that are  raised in ponds dug directly in the earth. The chemical culprits are two compounds  that are produced by blue-green algae, especially in warm weather (geosmin and  methylisoborneol). These chemicals appear to concentrate in the skin and the dark  muscle tissue, which can be cut away to make the fish more palatable. Geosmin
breaks down in acid conditions, so there is a good chemical reason for traditional  recipes that include vinegar and other acidic ingredients.  Fishiness   The moment fish are caught and killed, other aromas begin to develop.  The strong smell that we readily identify as “fishy” is largely due to the saltwater-  balancing compound TMAO (p. 188), which bacteria on the fish surfaces slowly  break down to smelly TMA. Freshwater fish generally don’t accumulate TMAO, and  crustaceans accumulate relatively little, so they don’t get as fishy as ocean fish. In  addition, the unsaturated fats and fresh-smelling fragments (aldehydes) produced  from them slowly react to produce other molecules with stale, cheesy characters,  some of which accentuate the fishiness of TMA. And during frozen storage, the  fish’s own enzymes also convert some TMA to DMA (dimethylamine), which smells  weakly of ammonia.  Flavor Compounds in Raw Fish and Shellfish  The basic flavors of fish and shellfish arise from their different combinations of  taste and aroma molecules.  Source  Amino  acids:  sweet,  savory  Salts:  salty  IMP:  savory  TMA:  fishy  Bromo-  phenol :  sea-air  Ammonia  (from  urea)  Geosmin,  borneol:  muddy  Terrestrial  meats   +   +   +   –   –   –   –  Freshwa-ter  fish   +   +   +   –   –   –   +  Saltwater  fish   +++   +   +++   +++   +   –   –  Sharks and  rays   +++   ++   ++   +++   +   +++   –  Molluscs   +++   +++   +   ++   +   –   –  Crusta-  ceans   ++++   +++   +   +   +   –   –
Fortunately, the fishiness of fish past its prime can be greatly reduced a couple of  simple treatments. TMA on the surface can be rinsed off with tap water. And acidic  ingredients — lemon juice, vinegar, tomatoes — help in two ways. They encourage  the stale fragments to react with water and become less volatile; and they  contribute a hydrogen ion to TMA and DMA, which thereby take on a positive  electrical charge, bond with water and other nearby molecules, and never escape  the fish surface to enter our nose.  The aromas of cooked fish are discussed on p. 208.  Fish Color  Pale Translucence   Most of the muscle in most raw fish is white or off-white and  delicately translucent compared to raw beef or pork, whose cells are surrounded  by more light-scattering connective tissue and fat cells. Especially fatty portions of  fish, such as salmon and tuna bellies, look distinctly milky compared to flesh from  just a few inches away. The translucence of fish muscle is turned into opacity by  cooking treatments that cause the muscle proteins to unfold and bond to each  other into large, light-scattering masses. Both heat and marination in acid unfold  proteins and turn fish flesh opaque.  Red Tunas   The meaty color of certain tunas is caused by the oxygen-storing  pigment myoglobin (p. 132), which these fish need for their nonstop, high-velocity  life (p. 201). Fish myoglobin is especially prone to being oxidized to brownish  metmyoglobin, especially at freezer temperatures down to –22ºF/–30ºC; tuna must  be frozen well below this to keep its color. During cooking, fish myoglobins  denature   and   turn   gray-brown   at   around   the   same   temperature   as   beef  myoglobin, between 140 and 160ºF/60 and 70ºC. Because they are often present in  small quantities, their color change can be masked by the general milkiness  caused when all the other cell proteins unfold and bond to each other. This is why  fish with distinctly pink raw flesh (albacore tuna, mahimahi) will turn as white as  any white fish when cooked.  Orange-Pink Salmons and Trouts   The characteristic color of the salmons is due to  a chemical relative of the carotene pigment that colors carrots. This compound,  astaxanthin, comes from the salmons’ small crustacean prey, which create it from  the beta-carotene they obtain from algae. Many fish store astaxanthin in their skin  and ovaries, but only the salmon family stores it in muscle. Because farmed salmon
and trout don’t have access to the wild crustaceans, they have paler flesh unless  their feed is supplemented (usually with crustacean shell by-products or an  industrially produced carotenoid called canthaxanthin).  The Fish We Eat  The number of different kinds of fish in the world is staggering. Of all the animals  that have backbones, fish account for more than half, something approaching  29,000 species. Our species regularly eats hundreds of these. Perhaps two dozen  are at least occasionally available in U.S. supermarkets, and another several dozen  in upscale and ethnic restaurants, often under a variety of names. The box  beginning on p. 195 surveys the family relations of some commonly eaten fish, and  the paragraphs that follow provide a few details about the more important  families.  Shellfish are also a diverse group of animals. They lack backbones and differ from  finfish in important ways, so they’re described separately, p. 218.  Names and Family Relations of Commonly Eaten Fishes  Closely related families are grouped together, and neighboring groups in the  chart are more closely related than widely separated groups. Saltwater  families are listed without special indication; “f” means a freshwater family and  “f&s” a family that includes both freshwater and saltwater species.  Family  Number of  Species   Examples  Shark (several)   350   Blue ( Prionace ), thresher ( Alopias ), hammerhead  (S phyrna ), black-tipped ( Carcharinchus ), dogfish  ( Squalus ), porbeagle ( Lamna ), smooth hound  ( Mustelus )  Skate   200   Skates ( Raja )  Ray   50   Rays ( Dasyatis, Myliobatis )  Sturgeon   24   Beluga, kaluga ( Huso ); osetra, sevruga, Atlantic, lake,  green, white (all   Acipenser )
Family  Number of  Species   Examples  Paddlefish (f)   2   American, Chinese paddlefish ( Polyodon, Psephurus )  Gar   7   Gar ( Lepisosteus )  Tarpon   2   Tarpon ( Tarpon )  Bonefish   2   Bonefish ( Albula )  Eel, Common (f&s)   15   European, North American, Japanese eel (all Anguilla )  Eel, Moray   200   Moray eel ( Muraena )  Eel, Conger   150   Conger eel ( Conger ), pike conger eel ( Muraenesox )  Anchovy   140   Anchovy ( Engraulis, Anchoa, Anchovia, Stolephorus )  Herring   180   Herring ( Clupea ), sardine, pilchard ( Sardina  pilchardus ); sprat ( Sprattus ), shad ( Alosa ), hilsa ( Hilsa )  Milkfish   1   Milkfish ( Chanos )  Carp (f)   2,000   Carp ( Cyprinus, Carassius, Hypophthalmichthys,   etc.),  minnow ( Notropis, Barbus ), tench ( Tinca )  Catfish (f)   50   North American catfish ( Ictalurus ), bullhead  ( Ameirus )  Sheatfish (f)   70   Wels ( Silurus ), Eastern European  Catfish, Sea   120   Sea catfish ( Arius, Ariopsis )  Pike (f)   5   Pike, pickerel ( Esox )  Smelt   13   Smelt ( Osmerus, Thaleichthys ), capelin ( Mallotus ), ayu  ( Plecoglossus )  Salmon (s&f)   65   Salmons ( Salmo, Oncorhynchus ), trouts ( Salmo,  Oncorhynchus, Salvelinus ), char ( Salvelinus ), whitefish  & cisco ( Coregonus ), grayling ( Thymallus ), huchen  ( Hucho )  Lizardfish   55   Lizardfish ( Synodus ), Bombay duck ( Harpadon )  Moonfish   2   Moonfish, opah ( Lampris )  Cod   60   Cod ( Gadus ), haddock ( Melanogrammus ), saithe and  pollock ( Pollachius ), pollack ( Pollachius, Theragra ),  ling ( Molva ), whiting ( Merlangus, Merluccius ), burbot  ( Lota ) (f)  Hake   20   Hake ( Merluccius, Urophycis )  Southern Hake   7   Hoki ( Macruronus )
Family  Number of  Species   Examples  Grenadier   300   Grenadier ( Coelorhynchus, Coryphaenoides )  Goosefish   25   Monkfish ( Lophius )  Mullet   80   Grey mullet ( Mugil )  Silversides   160   Silversides, grunion ( Leuresthes )  Needlefish   30   Needlefish, belone ( Belone )  Saury   4   Saury ( Scomberesox )  Flying Fish   50   Flying fish ( Cypselurus, Hirundichthys, Exocoetus )  Roughies   30   Orange roughy ( Hoplostethus )  Alfonsino   10   Alfonsino ( Beryx, Centroberyx )  Dory   10   John Dory, St. Pierre ( Zeus )  Oreo   10   Oreos ( Allocyttus, Neocyttus )  Rockfish   300   Rockfish, “ocean perch,” U.S. coastal “snappers”  ( Sebastes ); scorpionfish ( Scorpaena )  Searobin   90   Gurnard ( Trigla )  Sablefish   2   “Black cod” ( Anoplopoma )  Greenling   10   Greenling ( Hexagrammos ), “ling cod” ( Ophiodon )  Sculpin   300   Sculpin ( Cottus, Myoxocephalus ), cabezon  ( Scorpaenichthys )  Lumpfish   30   Lumpfish ( Cyclopterus )  Snook (f&s)   40   Nile perch, Australian barramundi ( Lates ); snook  ( Centropomus )  Bass, Temperate  (f&s)  6   European sea bass ( Dicentrarchus ), American striped,  white, yellow bass (all   Morone )  Bass, Sea   450   Black sea bass ( Centropristis ), groupers ( Epinephelus,  Mycteroperca )  Sunfish (f)   30   Sunfish, bluegill ( Lepomis ); small- & large-mouth bass  ( Micropterus ), crappies ( Pomoxis )  Perch (f)   160   Perches ( Perca ), walleye ( Stizostedion )  Tilefish   35   Tilefish ( Lopholatilus )  Bluefish   3   Bluefish ( Pomatomus )  Dolphin Fish   2   Dolphin fish, mahimahi ( Coryphaena )
Family  Number of  Species   Examples  Jack   150   Jack ( Caranx ), amberjack & yellowtail ( Seriola ), horse  mackerel ( Trachurus ), scad ( Decapterus ), pompanos  ( Trachinotus )  Butterfish   20   Pomfrets ( Pampus, Peprilus, Stromateus )  Snapper   200   Snappers ( Lutjanus, Ocyurus, Rhomboplites ),  Hawaiian onaga ( Etelis ), uku ( Aprion ), opakapaka  ( Pristipomoides )  Porgy   100   Porgies ( Calamus, Stenotomus, Pagrus ), tai  ( Pagrosomus ), sea breams ( Sparus ), dentex ( Dentex ),  sheepshead ( Archosargus )  Drum/Croaker   200   Redfish ( Sciaenops ), Atlantic croaker ( Micropogonias )  Goatfish   60   Red mullets, rouget ( Mullus )  Cichlid (f)   700   Tilapia ( Oreochromis   =   Tilapia )  Cod Icefish   50   “Chilean sea bass” ( Dissostichus )  Barracuda   20   Barracudas ( Sphyraena )  Snake Mackerel   25   Escolar ( Lepidocybium ), waloo, ruvettus ( Ruvettus )  Cutlassfish   20   Cutlassfish ( Trichiurus )  Tuna and Mackerel   50   Tunas ( Thunnus, Euthynnus, Katsuwonus, Auxis ),  Atlantic, chub mackerels ( Scomber ); Spanish, sierra,  cero mackerel ( Scomberomorus ); wahoo/ono  ( Acanthocybium ), bonitos ( Sarda )  Billfish   10   Sailfish ( Istiophorus ), spearfish ( Tetrapturus ), marlin  ( Makaira ), swordfish ( Xiphias )  Flounder, Lefteye   115   Turbot ( Psetta ), brill ( Scophthalmus )  Flounder, Righteye   90   Halibuts ( Hippoglossus, Reinhardtius ), plaice  ( Pleuronectes ), flounders ( Platichthys,  Pseudopleuronectes )  Sole   120   True soles ( Solea, Pegusa )  Puffer   120   Pufferfish, fugu ( Fugu ); blowfish ( Sphoeroides,  Tetraodon )  Sunfish   3   Mola ( Mola )  Adapted from J. S. Nelson,   Fishes of the World,   3d ed. (New York: Wiley, 1994).
The Herring Family: Anchovy, Sardine, Sprat, Shad  The herring family is an ancient, successful, and highly productive one, and for  centuries was the animal food on which much of northern Europe subsisted. Its  various species school throughout the world’s oceans in large, easily netted  numbers and are relatively small, often just a few inches long but sometimes  reaching 16 in/40 cm and 1.5 lb/0.75 kg.  Members of the herring family feed by constantly swimming and straining tiny  zooplankton from the seawater. They thus have very active muscle and digestive  enzymes that can soften their flesh and generate strong flavors soon after they’re  harvested. Their high fat content, upwards of 20% as they approach spawning, also  makes them vulnerable to the off-flavors of easily oxidized polyunsaturated fats.  Thanks to this fragility most of these fish are preserved by smoking, salting, or  canning.  Carp and Catfish  The freshwater carp family arose in east Europe and west Asia, and is now the  largest family of fish on the planet. Some of the same characteristics that have  made them so successful — the ability to tolerate stagnant water, low oxygen  levels, and temperatures from just above freezing to 100ºF/38°C — have also made  them ideal candidates for aquaculture, which China pioneered three millennia ago.  Carp themselves can reach 60 lb/30 kg or more, but are generally harvested  between one and three years when they weigh a few pounds. They’re relatively  bony fish, with a coarse texture and a low to moderate fat content.  The mostly freshwater catfish family is also well adapted to an omnivorous life in  stagnant waters, and therefore to the fish farm. Its most familiar member is the  North American channel catfish ( Ictalurus ), which is harvested when about 1 ft/30  cm long and 1 lb/450 gm, but can reach 4 ft/1.2 m in the wild. Catfish have the  advantage over the carps of a simpler skeleton that makes it easy to produce  boneless fillets; they keep well, as much as three weeks when vacuum-packed on  ice. Both carp and catfish can suffer from a muddy flavor (p. 193), particularly in the  heat of late summer and fall.
Salmons, Trouts, and Relatives  The salmons and trouts are among the most familiar of our food fishes — and  among the most remarkable. The family is one of the oldest among the fishes,  going back more than 100 million years. The salmons are carnivores that are born  in freshwater, go to the sea to mature, and return to their home streams to spawn.  The freshwater trouts evolved from several landlocked groups of Atlantic and  Pacific salmon.  Salmons and Their Characteristics  Fat  Content, %   size, lb/kg   Major Uses  Atlantic  Atlantic:   Salmo salar   14   100/45; 6–12/3–5  farmed  Fresh,  smoked  Pacific  King, Chinook:   Oncorhynchus  tshawytscha  12   30+/14   Fresh,  smoked  Sockeye, Red:   O. nerka   10   8/4   Fresh,  canned  Coho, Silver:   O. kisutch   7   30/14   Fresh,  canned  Chum, Dog:   O. keta   4   10–12/4–5   Roe, pet  food  Pink:   O. gorbuscha   4   5–10/2–4   Canned  Cherry, Amago (Japan and  Korea):   O. masou  7   4–6/2–3   Fresh  Salmons   Salmon develop their muscle mass and fat stores in order to fuel their  egg production and nonstop upstream migration, processes that consume nearly
half of their weight and leave their flesh mushy and pale. Salmon quality is thus at  its peak as the fish approach the mouth of their home river, which is where  commercial fishermen take them. The stocks of Atlantic salmon have been  depleted by centuries of overfishing and damage to their home rivers, so  nowadays most market fish come from farms in Scandinavia and North and South  America. The wild Alaska fishery is still healthy. Opinions vary on the relative  qualities of wild and farmed salmon. Some professional cooks prefer the fattiness  and more consistent quality of farm fish, while others prefer the stronger flavor  and firmer texture of wild fish at their best.  The Atlantic and the Pacific king salmons are well supplied with moistening fat,  and yet don’t develop the strong flavor that similarly fatty herring and mackerel  do. The distinctive salmon aroma may be due in part to the stores of pink  astaxanthin pigment, which the fish accumulate from ocean crustaceans (p. 194),  and which when heated gives rise to volatile molecules found in and reminiscent  of fruits and flowers.  Trouts, Chars, & Relatives  Trout family relations are complicated. Here’s a list of the more common  species and the part of the world they came from.  Common Name   Scientific Name   Original Home  Brown, salmon trout   Salmo trutta   Europe  Rainbow trout; Steelhead  (seagoing)  Oncorhynchus  mykiss  W. North America, Asia  Brook trout   Salvelinus  fontinalis  E. North America  Lake trout   Salvelinus  namaycush  N. North America  Arctic char   Salvelinus alpinus   N. Europe and Asia, N.  North America  Whitefish   Coregonus   species   N. Europe, North America
Trouts and Chars   These mainly freshwater offshoots of the salmons are excellent  sport fish and so have been transplanted from their home waters to lakes and  streams all over the world. Their flesh lacks the salmon coloration because their  diet doesn’t include the pigmented ocean crustaceans. Today, the trout found in  U.S. markets and restaurants are almost all farmed rainbows. On a diet of fish and  animal meal and vitamins, rainbow trout take just a year from egg to mild, single-  portion (0.5–1 lb/225–450 gm) fish. The Norwegians and Japanese raise exactly the  same species in saltwater to produce a farmed version of the steelhead trout,  which can reach 50 lb/23 kg, and has the pink-red flesh and flavor of a small  Atlantic salmon. Arctic char, which can grow to 30 lb/14 kg as migratory fish, are  farmed in Iceland, Canada, and elsewhere to about 4 lb/2 kg, and can be as fatty as  salmon.  The Cod Family  Along with the herring and tuna families, the cod family has been one of the most  important fisheries in history. Cod, haddock, hake, whiting, pollack, and pollock are  medium-sized predators that stay close to the ocean bottom along the continental  shelves, where they swim relatively little — and thus have relatively inactive  enzyme systems and stable flavor and texture. Cod set the European standard for  white fish, with its mild flavor and bright, firm, large-flaked flesh, nearly free of  both red muscle and fat.  Members of the cod family mature in two to six years, and once provided about a  third the tonnage of the herring-family catch. Many populations have been  exhausted by intensive fishing; but the northern Pacific pollock fishery is still  highly productive (it’s used mostly in such prepared foods as surimi and breaded  or battered frozen fish). Some cod are farmed in Norway in offshore pens.  Nile Perch and Tilapia  The mainly freshwater family of true perches are fairly minor foodfish in both  Europe and North America. More prominent today are several farmed relatives that  provide alternatives to scarce cod and flatfish fillets. The Nile or Lake Victoria perch  can grow to 300 lb/135 kg on a diet of other fish, and is farmed in many regions of  the world. The herbivorous tilapia is also a widely farmed native of Africa; it’s hardy  and grows well at 60–90ºF/20–35ºC in both fresh and brackish water. A number of
different species and hybrids are sold under the name tilapia, and have different  qualities.   Oreochromis nilotica   is said to have been cultured the longest and to have  the best flesh. The Nile perch and tilapia are among the few freshwater fish to  produce TMAO, which breaks down into fishy-smelling TMA (p. 193).  Basses  Bass Family Relations  Sea Bass  European sea bass   Dicentrarchus labrax  Black sea bass   Centropristis striatus  Striped bass   Morone saxtalis  North American Freshwater Bass  White bass   Morone chrysops  Yellow bass   Morone mississippiensis  White perch   Morone americana  Hybrid striped bass   Morone saxtalis   x   Morone chrysops  The freshwater basses and sunfish of North America are mostly sport fish, but one  has become an important product of aquaculture: the hybrid striped bass, a cross  between the freshwater white bass of the eastern United States and the seagoing  striped bass. The hybrid grows faster than either parent, is more robust, and yields  more meat, which can remain edible for up to two weeks. Compared to the wild  striped bass, the hybrid has a more fragile texture and bland flavor. Occasionally  muddy aroma can be reduced by removing the skin.  The ocean basses — the American striped bass and European sea bass (French  loup de mer,   Italian   branzino ) are prized for their firm, fine-flavored flesh and simple  skeletons; the sea bass is now farmed in the Mediterranean and Scandinavia.
Icefish  The “cod icefish” family is a group of large, sedentary plankton-eaters that live in  the cold deep waters off Antarctica. The best known of them is the fatty “Chilean  sea bass,” an inaccurate but more palatable commercial name for the Patagonian  toothfish ( Dissostichus eleginoides ), which can reach 150 lb/70 kg. Its fat is located  in a layer under the skin, in the chambered bones, and dispersed among the  muscle fibers: toothfish flesh can be nearly 15% fat. It wasn’t until the mid-1980s  that cooks came to know and appreciate this lusciously rich, large-flaked fish,  which is unusually tolerant of overcooking. Like the orange roughy and other  deepwater creatures, the toothfish is slow to reproduce, and there are already  signs that its numbers have been dangerously depleted by overfishing.  Tunas and Mackerel  Who would know from looking at a cheap can of tuna that it was made from one  of the most remarkable fish on earth? The tunas are large predators of the open  ocean, reaching 1,500 lb/680 kg and swimming constantly at speeds up to 40  miles/70 km per hour. Even their fast-twitch muscle fibers, which are normally  white and bland, contribute to the nonstop cruising, and have a high capacity for  using oxygen, a high content of oxygen-storing myoglobin pigment, and active  enzymes for generating energy from both fat and protein. This is why tuna flesh  can look as dark red as beef, and has a similarly rich, savory flavor. The meaty  aroma of cooked and canned tuna comes in part from a reaction between the  sugar ribose and the sulfur-containing amino acid cysteine, probably from the  myoglobin pigment, which produces an aroma compound that’s also typical of  cooked beef.  Tuna has been the subject of connoisseurship at least since classical times. Pliny  tells us that the Romans prized the fatty belly (the modern Italian   ventresca ) and  neck the most, as do the Japanese today. Tuna belly, or   toro,   can have ten times the  fat content of the back muscle on the same fish, and commands a large premium  for its velvety texture. Because the bluefin and bigeye tunas live longest, grow  largest, and prefer deep, cold waters, they accumulate more fat for fuel and  insulation than other species, and their meat can fetch hundreds of dollars per  pound.  These days, most tuna are harvested in the Pacific and Indian oceans. By far the
largest catches are of skipjack and yellowfin tuna, small and medium-sized lean  fish that reproduce rapidly and can be netted in schools near the surface. They also  provide most of the world’s canned tuna, with the solitary light-fleshed albacore  (Hawaiian tombo) giving “white” tuna. (Italian canned tuna is often made from the  darker, stronger bluefin and from the dark portions of skipjack.)  The Tuna Family  These major oceangoing tuna species are found worldwide.  Common  Name   Scientific Name   Abundance   Size  Fat  Content,  %  Bluefin   Thunnus thynnus  (northern);   T. maccoyii  (southern)  very rare   to 1500  lb/675 kg  15  Bigeye, ahi   T. obesus   rare   20–200  lb/9–90  kg  8  Yellowfin,  ahi  T. albacares   abundant   3–200  lb/1–90  kg  2  Albacore   T. alalunga   abundant   20–45  lb/9–20  kg  7  Skipjack   Katsuwonus pelamis   abundant   4–40  lb/2–20  kg  2.5  Mackerels   The mackerels are small relatives of the tunas. The mackerel proper is a  native of the North Atlantic and Mediterranean, typically 18 inches/45cm long and  1–2 lb/0.5–1 kg. Like the tuna, it’s an energetic predator, with a large complement  of red fibers, active enzymes, and an assertive flavor. It is usually netted in large
numbers   and   sold   whole,   and   deteriorates   rapidly   unless   immediately   and  thoroughly iced.  Swordfish  The billfish are a family of large (to 13 ft/ 4 m and 2,000 lb/900 kg), active predators  of the open oceans, with a spear-like projection from their upper jaw and dense,  meaty, nearly boneless flesh that has been sought after for thousands of years. The  preeminent billfish is the swordfish, whose Atlantic stock is thought to be down to  less than a tenth of its original size and in need of protection. Swordfish have a  dense, meaty texture and keep unusually well on ice, as long as three weeks.  Flatfish: Soles, Turbot, Halibuts, Flounders  Flatfish are bottom-dwelling fish whose bodies have been compressed from the  sides into a bottom-hugging shape. Most flatfish are relatively sedentary, and  therefore are only modestly endowed with the enzyme systems that generate  energy for the fish and flavor for us. Their mild flesh generally keeps well for several  days after harvest.  The most prized flatfish is Dover or English sole, the principal member of a family  found mainly in European waters (lesser U.S. flatfish are often misleadingly called  sole). It has a fine-textured, succulent flesh said to be best two or three days after  harvest, a trait that makes it an ideal fish for air-shipping to distant markets. The  other eminent flatfish, the turbot, is a more active hunter. It can be double the size  of the sole, with a firmer flesh that is said to be sweetest in a freshly killed fish.  Thanks to their ability to absorb some oxygen through the skin, small turbot are  farmed in Europe and shipped live in cold, moist containers to restaurants  worldwide.  The halibut is the largest of the flatfish and a voracious hunter. The Atlantic and  Pacific halibuts (both species of   Hippoglossus ) can reach 10 ft/3 m and 650 lb/300  kg, and their firm, lean flesh is said to retain good quality for a week or more. The  distantly related “Greenland halibut” is softer and fattier, and the small “California  halibut” is actually a flounder.
Flatfish Family Relations  There are many flatfish, and even more names for them; this list includes only  the more common. The names are often misleading: American waters don’t  harbor true soles; some halibuts aren’t halibuts or turbots turbots.  True European soles  Dover, English sole   Solea solea  French sole   Pegusa lascaris  Other European flatfish  Turbot   Psetta maxima  Atlantic halibut   Hippoglossus hippoglossus  Plaice   Pleuronectes platessa  Flounder   Platichthys flesus  West Atlantic flatfish  Halibut   Hippoglossus hippoglossus  Winter, common flounder, lemon sole   Pseudopleuronectes americanus  Summer flounder   Paralichthys dentatus  Greenland halibut or turbot   Reinhardtius hippoglossoides  East Pacific flatfish  Petrale sole   Eopsetta jordani  Rex sole   Glyptocephalus zachirus  Pacific sand dab   Citharichthys sordidus  Pacific halibut   Hippoglossus stenolepsis  California halibut   Paralichthys californicus  From the Waters to the Kitchen  The quality of the fish we cook is largely determined by how it is harvested and  handled by fishermen, wholesalers, and retail markets.
The Harvest  As we’ve seen, fish and shellfish are a more delicate and sensitive material than  meat. They’re the animal equivalent of ripe fruit, and ideally they would be  handled with corresponding care. The reality is otherwise. In a slaughterhouse it’s  possible to kill each animal in a controlled way, minimize the physical stress and  fear that adversely affect meat quality, and process the carcass immediately, before  it begins to deteriorate. The fisherman has no such mastery over the circumstances  of the catch, though the fish farmer has some.  Harvest from the Ocean   There are several common ways of harvesting fish from  the wild, none of them ideal. In the most controlled and least efficient method, a  few fisherman catch a few fish, ice them immediately, and deliver them to shore  within hours. This method can produce very fresh and high-quality fish —   if   they  are caught quickly with minimal struggle, expertly killed and cleaned, quickly and  thoroughly iced, and promptly delivered to market. But if the fish are exhausted,  processing is less than ideal, or cold storage is interrupted, quality will suffer. Far  more common are fish caught and processed by the thousands and delivered to  port every few days or weeks. Their quality often suffers from physical damage  caused by the sheer mass of the catch, delays in processing, and storage in less  than ideal conditions. Factory-scale trawlers and longliners also harvest huge  numbers of fish, but they do their own processing on board, and often clean,  vacuum-pack, and freeze their catch within hours. Such fish can be superior in  quality to unfrozen fish caught locally and recently but handled carelessly.  Harvest in Aquaculture   By contrast to the logistical challenge posed by fishing,  consider the care with which salmon are harvested in the best aquaculture  operations. First, the fish are starved for seven to ten days to reduce the levels of  bacteria and digestive enzymes in the gut that may otherwise accelerate spoilage.  The fish are anesthetized in chilled water saturated with carbon dioxide, then killed  either with a blow to the head or by bleeding with a cut through the blood vessels  of the gill and tail. Because the blood contains both enzymes and reactive  hemoglobin iron, bleeding improves the fish’s flavor, texture, color, and market life.  Workers then clean the fish while it’s still cold, and may wrap it in plastic to protect  it from direct contact with ice or air.
The Effects of Rigor Mortis and Time  We sometimes eat fish and shellfish very fresh indeed, just minutes or hours after  their death, and before they pass through the chemical and physical changes of  rigor mortis (p. 143). This stiffening of the muscles may begin immediately after  death in a fish already depleted by struggling, or many hours later in a fat-farmed  salmon. It “resolves” after a few hours or days when the muscle fibers begin to  separate from each other and from the connective-tissue sheets. Fish and shellfish  cooked and eaten before rigor has set in are therefore somewhat chewier than  those that have passed through rigor. Some Japanese enjoy slices of raw fish that  are so fresh that they’re still twitching ( ikizukuri ); Norwegians prize cod held in  tanks at the market and killed to order just before cooking ( blodfersk,   or “blood-  fresh”); Chinese restaurants often have tanks of live fish at the ready; the French  prepare freshly killed “blue” trout; and many shellfish are cooked alive.  In general, delaying and extending the period of rigor will slow the eventual  deterioration of texture and flavor. This can be done by icing most fish immediately  after harvest, before rigor sets in. However, early icing can actually toughen some  fish — sardine, mackerel, and warm-water fish such as tilapia — by disrupting their  contraction control system. Fish are generally at their prime just when rigor has  passed, perhaps 8 to 24 hours after death, and begin to deteriorate soon after that.  Recognizing Fresh Fish  Nowadays, consumers often have no idea where a given piece of fish in the market  has come from, when and how it was harvested, how long it has been in transit, or  how it has been handled. So it’s important to be able to recognize good-quality  fish when we see it. But looks and smell can be deceiving. Even perfectly fresh fish  may not be of the best quality if it has been caught in a depleted state after  spawning. So the ideal solution is to find a knowledgeable and reliable fish  merchant who knows the seasonality of fish quality, and buys accordingly. Such a  merchant is also more likely to be selective about his suppliers, and less likely to  sell seafood that’s past its prime.  It’s preferable to have fillets and steaks cut to order from a whole fish, because  cutting immediately exposes new surfaces to microbes and the air. Old cut  surfaces will be stale and smelly.
Handling Freshly Killed Fish  Sport fishermen may not get around to cooking their catch until it has already  begun to stiffen. Fortunately, fish in rigor aren’t as tough as beef or pork  would be. It’s a mistake, however, to cut up a freshly killed, pre-rigor fish into  steaks or fillets, and not either cook or freeze the pieces immediately. If rigor  develops in the pieces, the severed muscle fibers are free to contract, and  they will shorten by as much as half into a corrugated, rubbery mass. If  instead the pieces are quickly frozen, and then allowed to thaw gradually so  that the muscle energy stores slowly run down while the piece shapes are  maintained by some ice crystals, this contraction can be mostly avoided.  In the case of a whole fish:  •   The skin should be glossy and taut. On less fresh fish it will be dull and  wrinkled. Color is not a helpful guide because many skin colors fade quickly  after the fish dies.  •   If present, the natural proteinaceous mucus covering the skin should be  transparent and glossy. With time it dries out and dulls, the proteins  coagulate to give a milky appearance, and the color goes from off-white to  yellow to brown. The mucus is often washed off when the fish is cleaned.  •   The eyes should be bright, black, and convex. With time the transparent  surface becomes opaque and gray and the orb flattens out.  •   The belly of an intact fish should not be swollen or soft or broken, all signs  that digestive enzymes and bacteria have eaten through the gut into the  abdominal cavity and muscle. In a dressed fish, all traces of the viscera  should have been removed, including the long red kidney that runs along  the backbone.  If the fish has already been cut up, then:  •   The steaks and fillets should have a full, glossy appearance. With time, the  surfaces dry out and the proteins coagulate into a dull film. There should be  no brown edges, which are a sign of drying, oxidation of oils, and off-flavors.  •   Whether the fish is precut or whole, its odor should resemble fresh sea air or  crushed green leaves, and be only slightly fishy. Strong fishiness comes from
prolonged bacterial activity. More advanced age and spoilage are indicated  by musty, stale, fruity, sulfurous, or rotten odors.  Storing Fresh Fish and Shellfish: Refrigeration and Freezing  Once we’ve obtained good fish, the challenge is to keep it in good condition until  we use it. The initial stages of inevitable deterioration are caused by fish enzymes  and oxygen, which conspire to dull colors, turn flavor stale and flat, and soften the  texture. They don’t really make the fish inedible. That change is caused by  microbes, especially bacteria, with which fish slime and gills come well stocked —  particularly   Pseudomonas   and its cold-tolerant ilk. They make fish inedible in a  fraction of the time they take to spoil beef or pork, by consuming the savory free  amino acids and then proteins and turning them into obnoxious nitrogen-  containing   substances   (ammonia,   trimethylamine,   indole,   skatole,   putrescine,  cadaverine) and sulfur compounds (hydrogen sulfide, skunky methanethiol).  The first defense against incipient spoilage is rinsing. Bacteria live and do their  damage on the fish surface, and thorough washing can remove most of them and  their smelly by-products. Once the fish is washed and blotted dry, a close  wrapping in wax paper or plastic film will limit exposure to oxygen.  But by far the most important defense against spoilage is temperature control. The  colder the fish, the slower enzymes and bacteria do their damage.  Shellfish That Glow in the Dark  Some ocean bacteria (species of   Photobacterium   and   Vibrio ) produce light by  way of a particular chemical reaction that releases photons, and can cause  shrimp and crab to glow in the dark! So far, these luminescent bacteria appear  to be harmless to humans, though some can cause disease in the crustaceans.  Their glow indicates that the crustaceans are laden with bacteria and thus not  pristinely fresh.  Refrigeration: The Importance of Ice   For most of the foods that we want to store  fresh for a few days, the ordinary refrigerator is quite adequate. The exception to
the rule is fresh fish, whose enzymes and microbes are accustomed to cold waters  (p. 189). The key to maintaining the quality of fresh fish is ice. Fish lasts nearly twice  as long in a 32ºF/0ºC slush as it does at typical refrigerator temperatures of 40–  45ºF/5–7ºC. It’s desirable to keep fish on ice as continuously as possible: in the  market display case, the shopping cart, the car, and in the refrigerator. Fine flake or  chopped ice will make more even contact than larger cubes or slabs. Wrapping will  prevent direct contact with water that leaches away flavor.  In general, well iced fatty saltwater fish — salmon, herring, mackerel, sardine —  will remain edible for about a week, lean cold-water fish — cod, sole, tuna, trout —  about two weeks, and lean warm-water fish — snappers, catfish, carp, tilapia,  mullets — about three weeks. A large portion of these ice-lives may already have  elapsed before the fish appear in the market.  Freezing   To keep fish in edible condition for more than a few days, it’s necessary to  lower its temperature below the freezing point. This effectively stops spoilage by  bacteria, but it doesn’t stop chemical changes in the fish tissues that produce stale  flavors. And the proteins in fish muscle (especially cod and its relatives) turn out to  be unusually susceptible to “freeze denaturation,” in which the loss of their normal  environment of liquid water breaks some of the bonds holding the proteins in  their intricately folded structure. The unfolded proteins are then free to bond to  each other. The result is tough, spongy network that can’t hold onto its moisture  when it’s cooked, and in the mouth becomes a dry, fibrous wad of protein.  So once you’ve brought frozen fish home, it’s best to use it as soon as possible. In  general, the storage life of fish in ordinary freezers, wrapped tightly and/or glazed  with water to prevent freezer burn (freeze the fish, then dip in water, refreeze, and  repeat to build up a protective ice layer) is about four months for fatty fish such as  salmon, six months for most lean white fish and shrimp. Like frozen meats, frozen  fish should be thawed in the refrigerator or in a bath of ice water (p. 147).  Irradiation  Irradiation preserves food by way of high-energy particles that damage the DNA  and proteins of spoilage microbes (p. 782). Pilot studies have found that irradiation  can extend the refrigerated shelf life of fresh fish by as much as two weeks.  However, the initial deterioration of fish quality is caused by the action of fish  enzymes and oxygen, and this action proceeds despite irradiation. Also, irradiation
can produce off-flavors of its own. It’s unclear whether irradiation will become an  important means of preservation for fish.  Unheated Preparations of Fish and Shellfish  People in many parts of the world enjoy eating ocean fish and shellfish raw. Unlike  meats, fish have the advantage of relatively tender muscle and a naturally savory  taste, and are easier and more interesting to eat raw. They offer the experience of a  kind of primal freshness. The cook may simply provide a few accompanying  ingredients with complementary flavors and textures, or firm the fish’s texture by  means of light acidification ( ceviche ), salting ( poke ), or both (anchovies briefly  cured in salt and lemon juice). And raw preparations don’t require the use of fuel,  which is often scarce on islands and coastlines.  All uncooked fresh fish pose the risk of carrying a number of microbes and  parasites that can cause food poisoning or infection (p. 185). Only very fresh fish of  the highest quality should be prepared for consumption raw, and they should be  handled very carefully in the kitchen to avoid contamination by other foods.  Because parasitic worms are often found in otherwise high-quality fish, the U.S.  Food   Code   specifies   that   fish   sold   for   raw   consumption   should   be   frozen  throughout for a minimum of 15 hours at –31ºF/–35ºC, or for seven days at –4ºF/–  20ºC. The exceptions to this rule are the tuna species commonly served in  Japanese sushi and sashimi (bluefin, yellowfin, bigeye, albacore), which are rarely  infected with parasites. Despite this exception, most tuna are blast-frozen at sea so  that the boats can stay out for several days at a time. Sushi connoisseurs say that  the texture of properly frozen tuna is acceptable, but that the flavor suffers.  Sushi and Sashimi  Probably the commonest form of raw fish is sushi, whose popularity spread  remarkably in the late 20th century from its home in Japan. The original sushi  seems to have been the fermented preparation   narezushi   (p. 235);   sushi   means  “salted” and now applies more to the flavored rice, not the fish. The familiar bite-  sized morsels of raw fish and lightly salted and acidified rice are   nigiri   sushi,  meaning “grasped” or “squeezed,” since the rice portion is usually molded by hand.  The mass-produced version of sushi found in supermarkets is formed by industrial  robots.
Sushi chefs take great care to avoid contamination of the fish. They use a solution  of cold water and chlorine bleach to clean surfaces between preparations, and  they change cleaning solutions and cloths frequently during service.  Tart Ceviche and Kinilaw  Ceviche   is an ancient dish from the northern coast of South America, in which small  cubes or thin slices of raw fish are “cooked” by immersing them in citrus juice or  another acidic liquid, usually with onion, chilli peppers, and other seasonings. This  period of marination changes both the appearance and texture of the fish: in a thin  surface layer if it lasts 15–45 minutes, throughout if it lasts a few hours. The high  acidity denatures and coagulates the proteins in the muscle tissue, so that the gel-  like translucent tissue becomes opaque and firm: but more delicately than it does  when heated, and with none of the flavor changes caused by high temperatures.  Kinilaw   is the indigenous Philippine version of acid marination. Morsels of fish or  shellfish are dipped for only a few seconds into an acidic liquid, often vinegar  made from the coconut, nipa palm, or sugarcane, to which condiments have been  added. In the case of “jumping salad,” tiny shrimp or crabs are sprinkled with salt,  doused with lime juice, and eaten alive and moving.  Salty Poke and Lomi  To the world’s repertoire of raw fish dishes, the Hawaiian islands have contributed  poke   (“slice,”   “cut”) and   lomi   (“rub,”   “press,”   “squeeze”). These are small pieces of tuna,  marlin, and other fish, coated with salt for varying periods (until the fish stiffens, if  it’s to be kept for some time), and mixed with other flavorful ingredients,  traditionally seaweed and roasted candlenuts. Lomi is unusual in that the piece of  fish is first worked between the thumb and fingers before salting, to break some of  the muscle sheets and fibers apart from each other and soften the texture.  Cooking Fish and Shellfish  The muscle tissues of fish and shellfish react to heat much as beef and pork do,  becoming opaque, firm, and more flavorful. However, fish and shellfish are  distinctive in a few important ways, above all in the delicacy and activity of their  proteins. They therefore pose some special challenges to the cook who wants to
obtain a tender, succulent texture. Shellfish in turn have some special qualities of  their own; they’re described beginning on p. 218.  If it’s more important to produce the safest possible dish than the most delicious  one, then the task is simpler: cook all fish and shellfish to an internal temperature  between 185ºF/83ºC and the boil. This will kill both bacteria and viruses.  Preparing Fish in Ancient Rome  In summer in their lower rooms they often had clear fresh water run in  open channels underneath, in which there were a lot of live fish, which  the guests would select and catch in their hands to be prepared to the  taste of each. Fish has always had this privilege, as it still does, that the  great have pretensions of knowing how to prepare it. Indeed its taste is  much more exquisite than that of flesh, at least to me.  — Michel de Montaigne, “Of Ancient Customs,” ca. 1580  How Heat Transforms Raw Fish  Heat and Fish Flavor   The mild flavor of raw fish gets stronger and more complex  as its temperature rises during cooking. At first, moderate heat speeds the activity  of muscle enzymes, which generate more amino acids and reinforce the sweet-  savory taste, and the volatile aroma compounds already present become more  volatile and more noticeable. As the fish cooks through, its taste becomes  somewhat muted as amino acids and IMP combine with other molecules, while  the aroma grows yet stronger and more complex as fatty-acid fragments, oxygen,  amino acids, and other substances react with each other to produce a host of new  volatile molecules. If the surface temperature exceeds the boiling point, as it does  during grilling and frying, the Maillard reactions produce typical roasted, browned  aromas (p. 778).  Shellfish have their own distinctive cooked flavors (pp. 221, 225). Cooked fish fall  into four broad flavor families.  •   Saltwater white fish are the mildest.
•   Freshwater white fish have a stronger aroma thanks to their larger repertoire  of fatty-acid fragments and traces of earthiness from ponds and tanks.  Freshwater trout have characteristic sweet and mushroomy aromas.  •   Salmon and sea-run trout, thanks to the carotenoid pigments that they  accumulate from ocean crustaceans, develop fruity, flowery aromas and a  distinctive family note (from an oxygen-containing carbon ring).  •   Tuna, mackerel, and their relatives have a meaty, beefy aroma.  Fishiness and How to Fight It   The house-permeating “fishy” aroma of cooked fish  appears to involve a group of volatile molecules formed by fatty-acid fragments  reacting   with   TMAO   (p.   193).   Japanese   scientists   have   found   that   certain  ingredients help reduce the odor, apparently by limiting fatty-acid oxidation or  preemptively reacting with TMAO: these include green tea and such aromatics as  onion, bay, sage, clove, ginger, and cinnamon, which may also mask the fishy smell  with their own. Acidity — whether in a poaching liquid, or in a buttermilk dip  before frying — also mutes the volatility of fishy amines and aldehydes, and helps  break down muddy-smelling geosmin that farmed freshwater fish (catfish, carp)  sometimes accumulate from blue-green algae.  Simple physical treatments can also minimize fishy odors. Start with very fresh fish  and wash it well to remove oxidized fats and bacteria-generated amines from the  surface. Enclose the fish in a covered pan, or pastry crust, or parchment or foil  envelope, or poaching liquid, to reduce the exposure of its surface to the air; frying,  broiling, and baking all propel fishy vapors into the kitchen. And let the fish cool  down to some extent before removing it from its enclosure; this will reduce the  volatility of the vapors that do escape.  Heat and Fish Texture   The real challenge in cooking both fish and meat is to get  the texture right. And the key to fish and meat texture is the transformation of  muscle proteins (p. 149). The cook’s challenge is to control the process of  coagulation so that it doesn’t proceed too far, to the point that the muscle fibers  become hard and the juice flow dries up completely.  Target Temperatures   In meat cooking, the critical temperature is 140ºF/60ºC,  when the connective-tissue collagen sheath around each muscle cell collapses,  shrinks, and puts the squeeze on the fluid-filled insides, forcing juice out of the  meat. But fish collagen doesn’t play the same critical role, because its squeezing  power is relatively weak and it collapses before coagulation and fluid flow are well
underway. Instead, it’s mainly the fiber protein myosin and its coagulation that  determine fish texture. Fish myosin and its fellow fiber proteins are more sensitive  to heat than their land-animal counterparts. Where meats begin to shrink from  coagulation and major fluid loss at 140ºF/60ºC and are dry by 160ºF/70ºC, most  fish shrink at 120ºF/50ºC and begin to become dry around 140ºF/60ºC. (Compare  the behaviors of meat and fish proteins in the boxes on pp. 152 and 210).  In general, fish and shellfish are firm but still moist when cooked to 130–140ºF/55–  60ºC. Some dense-fleshed fish, including tuna and salmon, are especially succulent  at 120ºF, when still slightly translucent and jelly-like. Creatures with a large  proportion of connective-tissue collagen — notably the cartilagenous sharks and  skates — benefit from higher temperatures and longer cooking to turn it into  gelatin, and can be chewy unless cooked to 140ºF/60ºC or higher. Some molluscs  are also rich in collagen and benefit from long cooking (p. 225).  Why Some Fish Seem to Dry Out Faster Than Others  One puzzling aspect of fish cooking is the fact that different fish can have  surprisingly different tolerances for overcooking, despite similar protein and  fat contents. Rockfish, snappers, and mahimahi, for example, seem more  moist and forgiving than tuna or swordfish, which tend to become firm and  dry very quickly. Japanese researchers have peered through the microscope  and identified the likely culprits: the enzymes and other proteins in muscle  cells that are not locked in the contracting fibrils, but float free in the cell to  perform other functions. These proteins generally coagulate at a higher  temperature than the main contractile protein myosin. So when myosin  coagulates and squeezes cell fluids out, these other proteins flow out with the  fluid. Some of them then coagulate in the spaces between the muscle cells,  where they glue the cells together and prevent them from sliding easily apart  when we chew. Highly active swimmers like tunas and billfish require more  enzymes than sedentary bottom fish like snappers and cod, so their fibers get  glued more firmly to each other if they are cooked to 130ºF/55ºC and above.  Gentle Heat and Close Attention   In practice, it’s all too easy to overshoot the
ideal temperature range for fish. It takes only a matter of seconds to overcook a  thin fillet. Two characteristics of fish add to the trickiness of cooking them well.  First, whole fish and fillets are thick at the center and taper down to nothing at the  edges: so thin areas overcook while the thick areas cook through. And second, fish  vary widely in their chemical and physical condition, and therefore in their  response to heat. The fillets of cod, bluefish, and other species often suffer from  some   degree   of   gaping,   separations   of   muscle   layers   through   which   heat  penetrates more rapidly. Such fish as tuna, swordfish, and shark have very dense  flesh, crammed full of protein (around 25%), which absorbs a lot of heat before its  temperature rises; less active members of the cod family get by with less protein  (15–16%) in their muscle, and cook more rapidly. Fat transfers heat more slowly  than protein, so fatty fish take longer to cook than lean fish of the same size. And  the very same species of fish can be protein- or fat-rich one month, depleted and  quickly heated the next.  There are several ways to work around these inherent obstacles and uncertainties:  •   Cook the fish through with the gentlest possible heat, so that the outer  portions aren’t badly overcooked. Oven baking and poaching well below the  boil are two good ways to do this, after an initial and brief high-temperature  treatment to brown and/or sterilize the surfaces.  •   Compensate for uneven thickness by cutting slashes in the thick areas every  1–2 cm. This effectively divides the thick areas into smaller portions and  allows heat to penetrate more rapidly. Another strategy for relatively large  portions is to cover thin areas loosely with aluminum foil, which blocks  radiant heat and slows their cooking.  •   Check the fish early and often for doneness. Simple formulas — 10 minutes  to the inch is a popular one — and past experience can get you in the  vicinity of the correct time, but there’s no substitute for checking the  particular piece. This can be done by measuring the internal temperature  with a reliable thermometer, peering into a small incision to see whether the  interior is still translucent or already opaque, pulling on a small bone to see  whether the connective tissue has dissolved enough to release it, or pushing  a small skewer or toothpick into the flesh to see whether it encounters  resistance from coagulated muscle fibers.  Why Careful Cooking Sometimes Makes Fish Mushy   Slow and gentle heating  has an important place in meat cooking, and some fish — Atlantic salmon, for
example — can develop an almost custard-like texture if heated gently to 120ºF /  50ºC.   In   fish   cooking,   however,   slow   cooking   can   sometimes   produce   an  unpleasant, mushy texture. This is caused by protein-digesting enzymes in the  muscle cells of active fish and shellfish that help convert muscle mass into energy  (p. 189). Some of these enzymes become increasingly active as the temperature  rises during cooking, until they’re inactivated at 130–140ºF/55–60ºC. Mush-prone  fish (see box, p. 212) are best either cooked quickly to an enzyme-killing but  somewhat drying 160ºF/70ºC, or else cooked to a lower temperature and served  immediately.  The Effects of Heat on Fish Proteins and Texture  Fish   Tempera-  ture   Fish Qualities  Fiber-Weakening  Enzymes   Fiber Proteins  Connective-  Protein-Tissue  Bound Collagen  Water  70°F/20°C   Soft to touch;  Slick, smooth;  Translucent  Active   Beginning to  unfold  Beginning  Beginning to  weaken to  escape  100°F/40°C   Soft to touch;  Slick, smooth;  Translucent; Wet  surface  Active   Myosin begins to  denature,  coagulate  Collagen sheaths  Escape shrink,  rupture  accelerates; leaks  from cells  110°F/45°C   Begins to shrink;  Becoming  firmer;  Becoming  opaque; Exudes  juice  120°F/50°C   Continues to  shrink; Resilient;  Less slick, more  fibrous;  Opaque; Exudes  juice when cut  or chewed  Very active   Myosin  coagulated  Thick Leakage at  myocommata  maximum sheets  begin to shrink,  rupture  130°F/55°C   Sheets of  muscle begin to  separate;  Becoming flaky  Most denature,  become inactive  Other cell  proteins  denature,  coagulate
Fish   Tempera-  ture   Fish Qualities  Fiber-Weakening  Enzymes   Fiber Proteins  Connective-  Protein-Tissue  Bound Collagen  Water  140°F/60°C   Continues to  shrink; Firm;  Fibrous; Fragile;  Little free juice  Some become very  active and may badly  fragment muscle  fibers  Sheath collagen  Leakage  dissolves into  ceasing gelatin  150°F/65°C   Getting  progressively  more firm, dry,  flaky, fragile  Heat-resistant  enzymes  denature,  coagulate  Thick  myocommata  sheets dissolve  into gelatin  160°F/70°C   Stiff; Dry   Actin denatures,  coagulates  170°F/75°C   All now denatured,  inactive  180°F/80°C   Stiffness at  maximum  200°F/90°C   Fibers begin to  disintegrate  Preparations for Cooking  Cleaning and Cutting   Most fish in U.S. markets are sold precleaned and precut.  This is certainly convenient, but it also means that the scaled and cut surfaces have  been exposed to the air and bacteria for hours or days, drying out and developing  off-flavors. Preparing fish at the last minute can give fresher results. Both whole fish  and pieces should be rinsed thoroughly in cold water to remove fragments of  inner organs, the accumulation of odorous TMA, other bacterial by-products, and  bacteria themselves.  Presalting   Japanese cooks briefly presalt most fish and shrimp to remove surface  moisture and odor and firm the outer layers. This is especially useful for getting fish  skin to crisp and brown quickly when fried. As is true for meats, presoaking fish  and shellfish in a 3–5% salt brine will cause the flesh to absorb both water and salt,  with moisturizing and tenderizing results (p. 155).
Techniques for Cooking Fish and Shellfish  The many methods for heating meats and fish are described in detail in the  previous chapter, pp. 156–65. Briefly, “dry” heating methods — grilling, frying,  baking — produce surface temperatures high enough to produce the colors and  flavors of the browning reactions, while “moist” techniques — steaming, poaching  — fail to trigger browning, but heat foods more rapidly and can supply flavors  from other ingredients. (Chinese cooks often get the best of both methods by first  frying a fish and then finishing it with a brief braise in a flavorful sauce.) Fish don’t  require long cooking to dissolve their connective tissue and become tender. The  purpose of any given technique is to get the center of the fish promptly to the  proper temperature without overcooking the outer portions.  Handling Delicate Flesh   Its delicate and sparse connective tissue means that  most cooked fish is troublesomely fragile to work with. It’s best to manipulate fish  as little as possible during and after cooking, and to support the whole piece when  moving it, small ones with a spatula, large ones on a rack or a stretcher of foil or  cheesecloth. Neat individual portions should be cut before cooking, when the  tissue is still cohesive; after cooking, even a sharp knife pulls flakes and shreds from  the weakened matrix.  Grilling and Broiling   Grilling and broiling are high-temperature techniques that  cook mainly by radiant heat, and are well suited to relatively thin whole fish, fillets,  and steaks. For successful results, the thickness of the fish and the distance from  the heat must be balanced so that the fish can be cooked through at the center  without the outer portions becoming badly overcooked and dry. The fish must  either be firm enough to hold together when turned with a spatula — tuna,  swordfish, and halibut do well — or be supported in a closed wire rack that can be  turned without disturbing the fish. Thin fillets of sole and other flatfish are  sometimes put on a preheated buttered plate or aromatic cedar board and broiled  without turning.  Baking   Oven baking is a versatile method for cooking fish. Because it transfers  heat to the fish mainly by hot air, which is an inefficient method (p. 784), it’s  relatively slow and gentle, and makes it easier to avoid overcooking. This is true as  long as the container remains open to the oven air, when the fish moisture  evaporates and cools the surface to well below the thermostat temperature. If the  container is closed, water vapor builds up inside and the fish quickly steams rather
than bakes. The dry oven air is also useful for concentrating the fish juices and any  moist flavoring ingredients — wine, or a bed of aromatic vegetables, for example  — and it can also trigger aroma-producing browning reactions.  Low-Temperature Baking   In one extreme version of baking, the oven is set for  temperatures as low as 200 or 225ºF/ 95–110ºC, and the cooking is gentle indeed.  Because the fish surface is simultaneously warmed by the oven air and cooled by  evaporation of its moisture, the actual maximum temperature of the fish surface in  such an oven may be just 120–130ºF, the internal temperature even lower, and the  fish ends up with a barely cooked, almost custard-like texture. The appearance of  fish cooked this way is often marred by the off-white globs of solidified cell fluid,  which is able to leak out of the tissue before it gets hot enough for its dissolved  proteins to coagulate (normally these proteins, which constitute as much as 25%  of the total, coagulate within the muscle).  Mush-Prone Fish and Shellfish  Japanese studies have found that the following fish and shellfish have  especially active protein-digesting enzymes in their muscle, and tend to  become mushy when cooked slowly or held at temperatures around 130–  140ºF/55–60ºC.  Sardine, Herring, Mackerel ,Tunas, Chum salmon, Whiting, Pollack, Tilapia,  Shrimp, Lobster  High-Temperature Baking   At the other extreme, a very hot oven is often used in  restaurant kitchens to finish cooking through a portion of fish whose skin side has  been browned in a hot frying pan; pan and fish together are then slipped into the  oven, and the fish cooks through in a few minutes with heat from all directions,  without the necessity of turning it. A 500ºF/260ºC oven can also be used to “oven  fry” pieces of fish that have been breaded, spread out on a baking sheet, and  moistened with oil.  Cooking Under Wraps: Crusts, Envelopes, and Others   An ancient way of  cooking fish is to enclose it in a layer of some material — clay, coarse salt, leaves —  to shield it from direct heat, and then cook the whole package (see box below).
The fish inside will be more evenly and gently cooked, though checking the  temperature is still essential to avoid overcooking. Showy preparations with an  edible crust of pastry or brioche (French   en croûte ) are baked in the oven. A more  versatile technique is the use of a thin envelope of parchment ( en papillote ), or  aluminum foil, or a leaf, either neutral (lettuce) or flavorful (cabbage, fig, banana,  lotus,   hoja santa ), which can be used with almost any heat source, from grill to  steamer. But once the contents get hot enough, nearly all the heating is done by  the juices of the fish and vegetables themselves, which surround the food and  steam it. The envelope can be served intact and opened by the diner, releasing  aromas that would otherwise have been left behind in the kitchen.  Roman Fish in Parchment  Stuffed Bonito  Bone the bonito. Pound together pennyroyal, cumin, pepper, mint,  nuts, and honey. Stuff the fish with this mixture and sew it up. Wrap the  fish in paper and place it in a covered pan over steam. Season with oil,  reduced wine, and fermented fish paste.  — Apicius, first few centuries   CE  Frying   Fish is fried in hot metal pans in two different ways: with just enough oil to  lubricate the fish surface in contact with the pan, or with enough oil to surround  and cover most or all of the fish. Either way, the fish is exposed to temperatures  sufficient to dry out and brown its surfaces, and therefore develops a contrastingly  crisp outside and characteristic, rich aroma. Because high heat also makes the lean  flesh fibrous and chewy, fish to be fried is often given a protective coating of  starchy and/or proteinaceous material, so that the coating can crisp while the fish  remains moist. Common coatings include flour and flour-based batters; cornmeal  or breadcrumbs; ground spices or nuts or shredded coconut; thin shreds, strings,  or sheets of potato or another starchy root (sometimes cut and arranged to look  like fish scales); and rice paper. The adhesion of coating to fish can be improved by  first lightly salting the fish, which draws some protein-rich, sticky fluid to the  surface.  Frying is also an excellent way to crisp the skin on a whole fish or fillet. The skin will
dry out more rapidly and thoroughly if it’s first salted to remove moisture.  Fried surfaces stay crispest when they’re exposed to the air; confined between the  moist fish and plate, a crisp skin or coating soon reabsorbs moisture and softens.  Serve crunchy-skinned fillets skin-side up, or at least give the skin room to breathe.  Sautéing   When frying in a small amount of oil, it’s best to heat the pan before  adding the oil (this reduces oil breakdown into sticky polymers), or lightly oil the  fish surfaces instead. If an especially crisp skin or crust is desired, the fish should be  started on that side, pressed gently to maximize contact between hot pan and  skin, and left long enough on high heat to develop the desired texture, then  turned once and allowed to finish cooking through on lower heat. Thin fillets cook  in just a few minutes per side, and require a hotter pan in order to brown quickly.  Deep Frying   In deep frying, the fish is usually protected with a batter or breading,  and more or less immersed in oil, a relatively inefficient conductor of heat, at a  temperature around 350ºF/175ºC, well above the boiling point of water. The  surface dries out and gets hot enough to brown and to develop a characteristic  rich aroma and a crisp crust that acts as a layer of insulation and slows subsequent  heating. The fish is therefore heated evenly from all directions, but fairly gently,  giving the cook some leeway in removing it while it’s still moist inside.  Japanese Tempura   The classic Japanese version of fried fish is fish   tempura,   a  preparation   and   term   that   were   borrowed   in   the   late   16th   century   from  Portuguese and Spanish missionaries who cooked fish during fasting seasons  ( tempora   means “period of time”). Tempura — which now means a batter-fried  food of any sort — is characterized by relatively small pieces that cook in just a few  minutes, and a fresh, barely mixed batter made from an egg yolk, 1 cup/120 gm  flour, and 1 cup/250 ml ice water stirred together with chopsticks just before the  frying. As in all batters, cold water makes the mixture more viscous and thus better  retained on the fish surface. The freshness of the batter means that the flour  particles have little time to soak up water, so the moisture is rapidly removed from  their surfaces during frying to produce a crisp crust. And the minimal mixing  means an uneven batter consistency and therefore an uneven, lacy coating on the  fish, rather than a monolithic sheet.  Simmering, Poaching, Stewing   Immersing fish in hot liquid is a simple, flexible  method that offers the cook unmatched control over the heating. The liquid can be  very hot for cooking thin pieces in a matter of seconds, moderately hot for thicker
pieces, or start out cold for gently cooking a whole fish through; it can be flavored  in many different ways; and it can be turned into a sauce. When a fish or shellfish is  served in a generous quantity of its cooking liquid, however supplemented with  other ingredients, the French fittingly call it a preparation   à la nage,   or “aswim.”  The Cooking Liquids   Because fish don’t require prolonged cooking, there’s little  time for fish and cooking liquid to exchange flavors and mellow together. Cooking  liquids for fish are therefore either fairly neutral and discarded — salted water, or a  mixture of water and milk — or are prepared ahead of time to develop their flavor.  In the French tradition, there are two classic liquids for poaching fish: a tart, light  infusion   of   vegetables   and   herbs,   and   a   richer   stock   made   from   fish   and  vegetables.  Court bouillon,   or “briefly boiled liquid,” is a mixture of water, salt, wine or vinegar,  and vegetable aromatics, cooked together for 30–60 minutes into a medium that  will lightly flavor the fish. The vegetables soften and release flavor more rapidly if  the acid ingredient is added toward the end; black or white pepper is also added in  the last 10 minutes to avoid overextraction of its bitter components. A whole fish  poached in court bouillon will contribute both flavor and gelatin to the liquid,  which can then be boiled down to a succulent sauce, or else kept as a fish stock  and used later.  Fish stocks, or   fumets   (from the French for “aroma”), are also generally prepared in  an hour or less, since longer simmering of fragile fish bones can dissolve calcium  salts that then cloud the liquid and give it a chalky taste. Stocks are made with fish  bones, skins, trimmings, and heads, which are an especially rich source of gelatin  and flavor. (Gills are omitted because their flavor deteriorates quickly.) The higher  the proportion of fish, the more flavorful the stock; equal weights of water and fish  work well (e.g. 2 lb/1 kg per quart/liter). The pot is left uncovered to prevent  accidental boiling and clouding, and to allow slow evaporation and concentration.  To make a clear consommé, the resulting strained stock can be clarified with a  whipped mixture of egg whites and pureed raw fish, whose massed proteins trap  the tiny protein particles that cloud the liquid (p. 601) into a solid, easily removed  mass.  Fish are also poached in a variety of other liquids, including oil, butter, and such  emulsions as beurre blanc and beurre monté (p. 632). These offer the advantage of  slower, more gentle heat conduction and a more stable temperature thanks to  reduced evaporative cooling.
Poaching Temperatures   The great advantage of poaching fish is the ease of  controlling the heat to obtain a moist, succulent result. Moderate-sized fillets and  steaks should be started in liquid just below the boil and so hot enough to kill  surface microbes instantly. The pot should then be taken off the heat, cool liquid  added to bring its temperature down more quickly to around 150–160ºF/65–70ºC,  and the fish cooked through gently. Allowing the cooked fish to cool while  immersed in its liquid will leave it moister, since a hot piece of fish exposed to the  air evaporates its surface moisture away.  Poaching at the Table   Fish and shellfish cook so quickly in hot liquid that some  cooks make poaching part of the presentation at the table. Pour steaming  consommé into a bowl containing raw scallops or small cubes of fish, and the diner  can witness their instant opacification and savor the evolution of their texture.  Fish Aspics  Ordinary fish consommés are seldom concentrated enough in gelatin to set  into the firm, stable gel of an aspic (p. 607). For giving a glossy, aspic-like  coating to a cold fish preparation, cooks may supplement their simple  consommé with a small amount of commercial gelatin, or cook a second  batch of fish in the consommé. Fish gelatin melts at a lower temperature than  pig and beef gelatin — around 77ºF/25ºC, instead of 86ºF/30ºC — so a true  fish aspic melts more readily in the mouth, seems more delicate, and releases  its flavor faster.  Soups and Stews; Bouillabaisse   Fish stews and soups are dishes in which small  pieces of fish, sometimes several different fish, are served in their cooking liquid,  often with vegetables. The basic rules for simmering apply. The soup or stew base  is prepared ahead of time, and the fish pieces added at the end and cooked just  long enough to heat through: thick and dense pieces first, thin and delicate last.  Combinations of fish and shellfish are a nice acknowledgment of the sea’s  bounteous variety.  A gentle simmer is usually preferred to a rolling boil so as to avoid breaking up  delicate morsels. A partial exception to this rule is the   bouillabaisse   of southern
France, whose name includes the idea of boiling, and whose unique character  depends on the vigorous agitation that boiling provides. A bouillabaisse starts  with a stock made from scraps and small bony fish to provide gelatin and flavor,  tomatoes and aromatics for flavor and color, and a large dollop of olive oil —  perhaps a third of a cup/75 ml per quart/liter of liquid — which a fierce 10-minute  boil emulsifies into fine droplets throughout the soup. The dissolved fish gelatin  and suspended proteins coat the oil droplets and slow their coalescence (p. 628).  The other pieces of fish are added last and simmered to cook through, and the  soup is served immediately, before the oil has a chance to separate.  Steaming   Steaming is a rapid way to cook fish and is especially appropriate for  thin fillets, which can cook through quickly (thick pieces would overcook on the  surface while their interior cooks through). Subtle aromas are contributed by herbs  and spices, vegetables, and even seaweed, if they’re included in the steaming  water or provide a bed on which the fish sits.  Even cooking requires that the fish pieces be the same thickness, and that the  steam have equal access to all surfaces. If fillets taper down to a very thin end, fold  the thin layers over or interleave them with each other. More than one layer’s  worth of fish should be cooked in batches or divided among separate levels (as in  stackable Chinese bamboo steamers). Relatively thick steaks or whole fish are best  steamed below the boil, at an effective temperature of 180ºF/80ºC, to minimize  overcooking of the surface. This can be achieved by lowering the heat on the pot  and/or leaving the pot lid ajar. An even gentler effect is achieved by the Chinese  method of steaming fish without a lid, in which steam and room air combine to  give an effective cooking temperature of 150–160ºF/65–70ºC.  Microwaving   Microwave versions of simmered or steamed fish can be quite  successful thanks to the relatively thin dimensions of fillets and steaks, which the  electromagnetic waves can penetrate fully and cook quickly. To prevent especially  thin portions from overcooking, cover them with radiation-blocking pieces of  aluminum foil (p. 787), or overlap them with each other to a consistent thickness.  As in most microwave cooking, the food should be enclosed so that the surface  doesn’t dry out and toughen: wrap the fish pieces in parchment or the cooking  dish with plastic wrap, or simply place the fish between two inverted plates.  Waiting for the fish to cool down some before uncovering the dish will mean less  likelihood of a steam burn, a smaller billow of fishy aromas into the air, and less  moisture loss from the fish surface.
Stovetop Smoking   Smoking whole fish is a time-consuming and elaborate  process, and cold-smoking requires an appliance with separate chambers for the  smoke source and the fish (p. 236). But it’s a simple matter to flavor a few portions  with smoke on the backyard grill, or even indoors. Line the interior of an ordinary  saucepan and its lid with aluminum foil, scatter smokeable materials — small dry  wood chips or sawdust, sugar, tea leaves, spices — on the bottom, place presalted  fish pieces on a rack, turn the heat on high until smoke appears, then reduce the  heat to medium, cover the pot tightly, and allow the fish to “bake” in this 400–  500ºF/ 200–250ºC stovetop oven until barely cooked through.  Fish Mixtures  Like meats, fish can be chopped or pounded or ground up and mixed with other  ingredients to make balls, cakes, sausages, pâtés, terrines, and so on. This is an  excellent way to use small scraps or cooked leftovers, or fish that are bony or  otherwise unsuited to serving in large pieces. While meat mixtures are often  tenderized and enriched by chunks of fat, and firmed by conversion of the meat’s  connective tissue into gelatin, fish contain little connective tissue and no fat that is  solid at room temperature. Instead, many fish mixtures aim for a distinctive  lightness, and have for many centuries, as is clear from Anthimus’s early version of  the classic French dish   quenelles de brochet   (see box below).  Mousselines, Quenelles   The basic preparation for many refined fish mixtures is  the   mousseline,   from the French   mousse,   or “foam,” a term that describes the airy,  delicate consistency aimed for. Chilled raw fish is very finely chopped or pureed  (with care to avoid overheating in high-speed processors), then whisked with one  or   more   of   several   binding   and   enriching   ingredients.   The   whisking   also  incorporates air, which lightens the mixture. If the fish is very fresh, then it can be  enriched and tenderized with cream and bound simply with salt, which extracts  some myosin protein from the muscle fibers to help them stick together. With less  pristine fish — weeks in the freezer can cause premature protein aggregation and  a wet, crumbly puree — egg whites help hold the particles of fish muscle together,  as do various starchy materials, including bread crumbs, flour-based béchamel and  velouté sauces, pastry doughs, and mashed rice or potatoes. The mousseline  mixture is firmed by refrigeration, then shaped into dumpling-like   quenelles,   or  wrapped inside thin fish fillets ( paupiettes ), and gently poached; or it’s put in  ramekins or a pan and cooked in a water bath to make pâtés and terrines. The
target temperature at the center is 140–150ºF/60–65ºC; higher temperatures give a  harder, heavier result.  Fish Balls and Cakes   Quenelles are essentially refined fish balls, a genre of which  there are many regional variations. Chinese fish balls are bound with egg and  cornstarch, lightened with water; Norwegian fish balls are enriched with butter  and cream, bound with potato flour; Jewish gefilte fish (thought to derive via  eastern Europe from French   quenelles ), bound with eggs and matzoh meal, and  aerated by chopping. Less delicate and tricky fish mixtures include coarse cakes  and croquettes bound with eggs and starchy particles like bread crumbs, and  mousses made from cooked fish and held together with starchy sauces or gelatin.  Ancient   Quenelles  Pike is good too. Egg white should be mixed into the dish called  spumeum which is made with pike, so that this dish may be quite soft  rather than hard, and wholesome when mixed together.  — Anthimus,   On the Observance of Foods,   ca. 600   CE  Fingers and Burgers, Surimi   Commercial “minced” fish products are made from a  variety of white ocean fish that would otherwise be discarded as too small or bony.  They run the range from coarse-textured fish sticks and fishburgers to finer patties  and paste-like spreads. Imitation fish fillets and shellfish meats are made by  extruding highly processed mixtures of fish paste and other structure-reinforcing  ingredients, including seaweed-derived alginate gums and textured vegetable  proteins.  The most widely consumed form of processed fish is   surimi,   the Japanese term for  “minced fish,” which is nearly 1,000 years old and is now made into many imitation  shellfish products. Surimi is made by finely mincing fish scraps (today, usually  pollack), washing them, pressing them to remove the wash water, salting and  seasoning the mince, shaping it, and boiling it until it solidifies. Washing the mince  removes nearly everything from the muscle except the muscle fiber membranes  and contracting proteins. Salting then dissolves the protein myosin out of the  muscle   fibers,   so   that   when   it’s   heated,   the   myosin   will   coagulate   into   a
continuous, solid, elastic gel in which the other fiber materials are embedded. The  result is a flavorless, colorless, homogeneous matrix that can be flavored, colored,  and formed to imitate nearly any seafood.  Shellfish and Their Special Qualities  Though shellfish have much in common with finfish and are cooked in many of the  same ways, they’re also distinctive. Most of the shellfish we eat are creatures from  one of two groups, the crustaceans and the molluscs. Unlike true fish, these  creatures are invertebrates: they don’t have a backbone or internal skeleton; and  most of them don’t swim much. Their body tissues are therefore organized  differently, undergo different kinds of seasonal changes, and require special  treatment from the cook.  Crustaceans: Shrimps, Lobsters, Crabs, and Relatives  Crustaceans are the shellfish that have legs and sometimes claws: shrimps and  prawns, lobsters and crayfish, and crabs. Like the molluscs, the crustaceans are an  ancient and successful group of animals. There were primitive shrimps 200 million  years ago; today there are some 38,000 crustacean species, the largest with a claw  span of 12 feet/4 meters! The crustaceans are members of the large animal group  known as   arthropods,   and are relatives of the insects. Like the insects, they have a  body made up of several segments, a hard outer cuticle, or exoskeleton, that  protects and supports the muscles and organs within, and many rigid appendages  that are adapted to a variety of purposes, including swimming, crawling, and  attacking prey. Most edible crustaceans are “decapods,” meaning they have five  pairs of legs, one of which is sometimes greatly enlarged into claws. The meat of  crustaceans is mainly skeletal muscle like that of fish and our land livestock.  (Notable exceptions are the immobile barnacles, prized in Spain and South  America.)  Because they’re mobile, carnivorous, and often cannibalistic, crustaceans aren’t as  easy to farm as molluscs. The greatest success has come with the shrimps, thanks  to their ability to grow rapidly on both plant feeds and very small animals.  Crustacean Anatomy   All crustaceans share the same basic body plan, which can  be divided roughly into two parts. The forward portion, or   cephalothorax,   often
called the “head” in shrimp, is the equivalent of our head and trunk put together. It  includes the mouth, sensing antennae and eyes, five pairs of manipulating and  crawling   appendages,   and   the   main   organs   of   the   digestive,   circulatory,  respiratory, and reproductive systems. The rear portion, or   abdomen,   usually called  the “tail,” is mostly a large, meaty block of swimming muscle that moves the fin-like  plates at the back end. The major exception to this body plan is the crab, which  seldom swims; its abdomen is a thin plate folded up underneath a greatly enlarged  cephalothorax.  Crustacean anatomy. The forward part of the crustacean body, the cephalothorax or  “head,” contains the digestive and reproductive organs. The rear part, the abdomen or  “tail,” is mainly fast muscle tissue that moves the rear fins and propels shrimp (top) and  lobsters (center) in brief swimming maneuvers. The crab (bottom) has only a vestigial  abdomen tucked under its massive cephalothorax.  The most important organ in the crustacean is what biologists call the   midgut  gland   or   hepatopancreas,   and what the rest of us usually call the “liver.” This is the  source of enzymes that flow into the digestive tube and break down ingested  foods; it’s also the organ in which fatty materials are absorbed and stored to  provide energy during molting (below). It’s thus one of the richest, most flavorful  parts of the body, and is especially prized in lobsters and crabs. But it’s also what  makes crustaceans spoil so readily. The gland is made up of tiny fragile tubes; and  when the animal is killed, the tubules are readily attacked and damaged by their
own enzymes, which then spread into the muscle tissue and break it down into  mush. There are several ways to avoid this spoilage. Lobsters and crabs are sold  either live, their digestive system intact, or fully cooked, their enzymes inactivated  by the cooking. Because the shrimp liver is relatively small, processors often  remove the “head” that contains it, and sell only the tail meat. Raw shrimp that are  sold “head-on” must   be   handled   with   greater   care   (iced   immediately   and  continuously) and don’t keep as long.  The Crustacean   Cuticle,   Molting,   and Seasonal   Quality   Another   defining  characteristic of the crustaceans is a “shell” or cuticle made up of   chitin,   a network  of molecules that are something of a hybrid between carbohydrates and proteins.  In shrimp, the cuticle is thin and transparent; in larger animals it’s thick and  opaque, hardened to a rock-like mass with calcium minerals filling the space  between chitin fibers.As a crustacean grows, it must periodically cast off the old  cuticle and create a larger new one. This process is called   molting.   The animal  constructs a new, flexible cuticle under the old one from its body’s protein and  energy reserves. It squeezes its shrunken body through weakened joints in the old  shell, then pumps up itself with water — from 50 to 100% of its original weight —  to stretch the new cuticle to its maximum volume. It then hardens the new cuticle  by cross-linking and mineralizing it, and gradually replaces its body water with  muscle and other tissues.  Molting means that the quality of crustacean flesh is highly variable, and this is  why wild harvests are seasonal, with the seasons depending on the particular  animal and location. An actively growing animal has dense, abundant muscle,  while an animal preparing to molt loses muscle and liver mass, and a newly molted  animal may be as much water as muscle.  Crustacean Color   Crustacean shells and eggs provide some of the table’s most  vivid colors. They are generally a dark green-blue-red-brown that helps them blend  in with the sea bottom, but turn a bright orange-red when cooked. The animals  create their protective coloration by attaching bright carotenoid pigments derived  from their planktonic diet (astaxanthin, canthaxanthin, beta-carotene and others)  to protein molecules, thus muting and altering their color. Cooking denatures the  proteins and frees the carotenoids to reveal their own true colors.  The shells of lobsters, crayfish, and some crabs are often cooked to extract both  flavor and color for sauces (the French sauce Nantua), soups, and aspics. Because
carotenoid pigments are much more soluble in fat than in water, more color will be  extracted if the cooking liquid is mainly fat or oil — butter, for example — or  contains some.  Crustacean Texture   Like fish flesh, most crustacean flesh consists of white, fast  muscle fibers (p. 131). Its connective-tissue collagen is both more abundant than  fish collagen and less easily dissolved by heat, so crustacean meat is less delicate  and easily dried out than fish. But the protein-breaking enzymes in the muscle are  very active, and can turn the meat mushy if they aren’t rapidly inactivated by the  heat of cooking. These enzymes work fastest when the temperature hits 130–  140ºF/55–60ºC, so the cook should either heat the flesh well above this range as  quickly as possible, or get it just into this range (for maximum moistness) and then  serve it immediately. Boiling and steaming are the most rapid heating methods,  and the usual treatments for shrimp, lobster, and crab.  Crustacean texture is also more tolerant of freezing than most fish; frozen shrimp  in particular can be quite good. However, domestic freezers are warmer than  commercial   freezers   and   allow   undesirable   chemical   changes   and   general  toughening to occur (p. 206), so frozen crustacean meats should be used as quickly  as possible.  Crustacean Flavor   The aromas of boiled shrimp, lobster, crayfish, and crab are  remarkable for their nutty, popcorn-like qualities, quite distinct from either mollusc  or fish aromas. Even meats don’t develop these notes unless they’re actually  roasted rather than boiled. They’re due to an abundance of molecules (pyrazines,  thiazoles) that are normally produced when amino acids and sugars react at high  temperatures (the Maillard reactions, p. 778). These reactions evidently take place  at lower temperatures in crustaceans, perhaps thanks to the unusual concentration  of free amino acids and sugars in their muscle tissue. Among the amino acids that  sea creatures accumulate in their cells to balance the salt in the water, crustaceans  favor glycine, which has a sweet taste and lends sweetness to their meat.  The distinctive iodine-like flavor found frequently in gulf brown shrimps and  occasionally in other crustaceans originates in bromine compounds that the  animals accumulate from algae and other foods, and then convert to unusual and  more odorous compounds (bromophenols) in their gut.  It’s often observed that crustaceans are more flavorful when cooked in their shells.  The cuticle reduces the leaching of flavor compounds from the flesh, and is itself a
concentrated mass of proteins, sugars, and pigment molecules that can flavor the  outer layer of flesh.  Choosing and Handling Crustaceans   Because their flesh is so easily damaged by  their own enzymes once they’re dead, crustaceans are generally sold to consumers  either frozen, cooked, or alive. Most “fresh” raw shrimp have been obtained frozen  and thawed by the store. Ask for a sniff of one, and don’t buy if you smell ammonia  or other off-odors. Cook them the same day.  The larger crustaceans, lobsters and crabs, are generally sold either precooked or  alive. Live crustaceans should come from a clean-looking tank, and should be  active. They can be kept alive in a moist wrapping in the refrigerator for a day or  two. Relatively small lobsters and crabs will have finer muscle fibers and so a finer  texture.  Traditional recipes often treat lobsters, crayfish, and crabs as if they were insensible  to pain, calling for the cook either to cut them up or drop them in boiling water  while they’re still alive. These creatures don’t really have a central nervous system.  The “brain” in the head region receives input only from the antennae and eyes, and  each body segment has its own nerve cluster, so it’s hard to know whether or how  pain can be minimized. The most sensible-sounding advice comes from marine  biologists: anaesthetize the animal in iced salt water for 30 minutes just before  cutting up or boiling.  Shrimps and Prawns   Shrimp and prawns are the most commonly available  shellfish in the world. Their predominance stems from their delicious flavor,  conveniently small size, rapid reproduction in the wild and in aquaculture, and the  tolerance of their flesh to freezing. The two terms are often used for the very same  animals; in the United States, “prawn” usually means a larger variety of shrimp.  There are some 300 species of shrimp and close relatives exploited for food around  the world, but the most common belong to one semitropical and tropical genus,  Penaeus.   Species of   Penaeus   can mature in a year or less and grow as long as 9  in/24 cm. Temperate-water shrimp belong to a slower-growing group and are  usually smaller (a maximum of 6 in/15 cm). Today about a third of world  production is cultivated, mainly in Asia.  Shrimp Quality   Shrimp flavor declines in just a few days on ice due to the slow loss  of amino acids and other tasty small molecules. But thanks to their protective  cuticle, shrimp can remain edible for as much as 14 days. Shrimpers often treat
them with a bleaching solution of bisulfite to prevent discoloration, and like  scallops, with a sodium polyphosphate solution to keep them moist; these  practices can cause off-flavors.  The mainly muscular “tail” of the shrimp amounts to about two-thirds of its body  weight, so producers often separate it from the flavorful “head” and its midgut  enzymes, which can accelerate spoilage. The dark “vein” along the outside curve of  the abdomen is the end of the digestive tube, and can be gritty with the sand from  which the animals glean bacteria and debris; it’s easily pulled away from the  surrounding muscle. Though peeled, cooked shrimp are widely available and  convenient, serious shrimp lovers seek out fresh whole shrimp and cook them in  the shell, rapidly and briefly.  Food Words:   Shrimp, Prawn, Crab, Crayfish, Lobster, Crustacean  Most of our words for crustaceans go back to prehistoric times.   Shrimp   comes  from the Indo-European root   skerbh,   meaning to turn, bend, or shrink,  perhaps reflecting the curled shape of these creatures. The near-synonym  prawn   first appears in medieval times, and its origins are unknown.   Crab   and  crayfish   both derive from the Indo-European   gerbh,   meaning to scratch or  carve, something that crustacean claws readily do to human skin. Finally,  lobster   shares with   locust   the Indo-European root   lek,   meaning to leap or fly: a  remarkably early recognition of the family resemblance of crustaceans and  insects.  Crustacean   itself comes from an Indo-European root meaning to freeze, to  form a crust, and describes the hard outer skeleton of these creatures. It  shares this root with   crystal.  Lobsters and Crayfish   Saltwater lobsters (species of   Homarus   and   Nephrops ) and  freshwater crayfish ( Astacus, Procambarus,   and others) are generally the largest  crustaceans in their neighborhood. The American lobster once weighed as much  as 40 lb/19 kg, while today it’s typically 1–3 lb/450–1,350 gm. And more than 500  species of crayfish have evolved in the fresh waters of isolated rivers and streams,  especially in North America and Australia. Most are relatively small, but the
Australian marrons and “Murray lobsters” can exceed 10 lb/4.5 kg. Crayfish are the  most easily cultured of the crustaceans, and have been raised in natural ponds in  the Atchafalaya Basin of Louisiana for better than two centuries. They’re also prized  in Sweden.  The main attraction of all these creatures is their white “tail” meat. Three European  and American lobster species and their crayfish cousins have large claws, which in  the American lobster can amount to half the total body weight. A larger group of  more distant relatives, the spiny and rock lobsters ( Palinurus, Panuliris, Jasus   and  others), are less impressively endowed, and are called “clawless”; they supply much  frozen lobster tail, because their meat freezes better than clawed lobster meat. The  claw meat is noticeably different from the main body and tail meats. Because they  require more stamina, claw muscles include a substantial proportion of slow red  fibers (p. 132), and have a distinctive, richer flavor.  Lobsters and crayfish are often sold live to consumers. The prime season for  Louisiana crayfish is generally local winter through spring, when the animals are  heaviest and firm-fleshed. The lobster body contains the flavorful digestive gland  known as the liver or tomalley, a pale mass that turns green when cooked. Females  may also contain an ovary, a mass containing thousands of 1–2 mm eggs, which  turns red-pink when cooked; hence its name “coral.” Lobster liver and coral are  sometimes removed before cooking, and then crushed to a paste and added to  hot sauces at the last minute to contribute their color and flavor.  Crustacean innards. The cephalothorax of crustaceans contains a large, flavorful  digestive   gland,   the   hepatopancreas,   whose   enzymes   can   also   damage   the  surrounding muscle. The dark, sometimes gritty “vein” along the tail muscle is actually  the end of the digestive tube.  Crabs   Crabs are tailless. Instead they have a massive cephalothorax, whose
musculature enables these creatures to live in the deepest sea, burrow on land,  and climb trees. Most crabs have one or two powerful claws for holding, cutting,  and crushing their prey. Crab claw meat is flavorful but coarser and harder to get at  than the body meat, and generally not as prized. Exceptions are the massive and  flavorsome single claws of the Florida stone crab and European fiddler crab. The  legs of the north Pacific king crabs, which can span 4–6 ft/1.2–1.8 m, provide large  cylinders of meat that are often sold frozen.  Most commercial crabs (species of   Callinectes, Carcinus, Cancer,   and others) are still  caught alive in baited traps or dredges. They may be sold live, or cooked and  whole, or cooked and processed into shell-less meat. This meat is then sold fresh,  or pasteurized, or frozen for longer keeping. In addition to the muscle tissue, the  crab’s large digestive gland, its “mustard” or “butter,” is prized for a rich, intense  flavor and creamy texture, which it lends to sauces or to crab pastes. Crab liver can  accumulate the toxins from algae that cause shellfish poisoning (p. 186), so state  regulators   monitor   toxin   levels   and   restrict   crabbing   when   they   become  significant.  Soft-shell crabs   Because freshly molted crustaceans have just spent much of their  protein and fat reserves and are absorbing water to fill out their new shell, eaters  generally disdain them. The major exceptions to this rule are the soft-shell shore  crab of Venice, and the soft-shell blue crab of the U.S. Atlantic coast, which is fried  and eaten whole. Animals that are about to molt are watched carefully and  removed from salt water as soon as they shed their old shell, since their new cuticle  would otherwise become leathery within hours and calcified hard in two or three  days.  Molluscs: Clams, Mussels, Oysters, Scallops, Squid, and  Relatives  Molluscs are the strangest creatures we eat. Take a close look sometime at an intact  abalone or oyster or squid! But strange or not, molluscs are plentiful and delicious.  Judging by the massive prehistoric piles of oyster, clam, and mussel shells that dot  the planet’s seacoasts, humans have feasted on these conveniently sluggish  creatures from the earliest days. This highly successful and diverse branch of the  animal kingdom got its start half a billion years ago and currently includes 100,000  species, double the number of fish and animal species with backbones, from snails
just a millimeter across to giant clams and squids.  The secret to the molluscs’ success — and their strangeness — is their adaptable  body plan. It includes three major parts: a muscular “foot” for moving; an intricate  assembly   that   includes   the   circulatory,   digestive,   and   sexual   organs;   and  enveloping this assembly, a versatile sheet-like “mantle” that takes on such jobs as  secreting materials for a shell, supporting eyes and small tentacles that detect food  or danger, and contracting and relaxing to control water flow into the interior. The  molluscan shellfish that we eat have combined these parts in very different ways.  •   Abalones, the most primitive, have one cup-like shell for protection, and a  massive, tough muscular foot for moving along and clinging to the seaweed  on which their rasping mouths feed.  •   Clams are enclosed in two shells, and burrow into the sand with their foot.  Modifications of the mantle have provided them with two pegs of muscle for  closing the shells, and with the muscular tube — the siphon or “neck” — that  they extend to the sand surface and use to draw in passing food particles. All  the bivalves — clams, mussels, oysters — have comb-like gills for filtering  food particles from the water that the mantle draws in and expels.  •   Mussels are also two-shelled filter feeders, but they attach their foot  permanently to intertidal and subtidal rocks. They have no need for a siphon,  and one of their tough shell-closing muscles is much reduced.  •   Oysters cement themselves to inter- and sub-tidal rocks. Their two heavy  shells are closed by a single large muscle at their center, around which the  mantle and other organs are organized. The bulk of their body is the tender  mantle and food-trapping gills.  •   Scallops neither attach nor bury themselves. They lie free on the ocean floor,  and escape predators by swimming. Their massive central muscle claps their  shells shut and forces water out one end, thus propelling them in the other  direction.  •   Squids and octopuses are molluscs turned inside out and transformed into  highly   mobile,   streamlined   carnivores   with   large   eyes   and   arms. The  remnants of a shell provide an internal support, and the mantle is now a  specialized muscular sheet that expands and contracts to provide jet  propulsion through a small funnel derived from the foot muscle.  The immobile molluscs do very well in aquaculture. They can be raised in large  numbers in the water’s three dimensions, suspended in nets or on ropes, and grow
rapidly thanks to the good circulation of oxygen and nutrients.  Bivalve Adductor Muscles   The two-shelled or “bivalve” molluscs must spread  their shells apart to allow water and food particles in, and pull their shells together  to protect their soft innards against predators or — in the case of intertidal  mussels and oysters — the drying air. To do this work they have evolved a special  muscle system, one that poses some challenges to the cook but is mostly a boon,  since these prepackaged animals can survive for many days in the refrigerator  covered only with a moist towel.  Bivalve shells are normally held open mechanically, by means of a spring-like  ligament that connects and pulls them together at the hinge end, and thus pulls  the opposite wide ends apart. To close the shells, the animal must power a muscle,  called an “adductor” (from the Latin   adducere,   “to bring together”), which extends  between the broad ends of the shell and contracts to overcome the spring force of  the ligament.  Tender Quick, Tough Catch   The adductor muscle has to perform two very different  kinds of work. One is to close the shell quickly to expel sediment, accumulated  wastes, or eggs, or to slam the door on predators. The other is to keep the shell  tightly closed for hours, sometimes even days, until the danger passes. These two  jobs are performed by adjoining parts of the muscle. The fast-contracting “quick”  portion is quite similar to the fast muscles of fish and crustaceans; it’s white,  translucent, and relatively tender. But the slow, tension-maintaining “catch” portion  is among the strongest muscles known, and can maintain its contraction with very  little expenditure of energy, thanks to biochemical tricks that lock the muscle  fibers in place once they’ve shortened, and reinforcement with large amounts of  connective-tissue collagen. Catch muscles have an opalescent appearance, much  like the tough tendons in a chicken leg or leg of lamb, and they are tough to eat as  well unless cooked for a long time. In the scallop, the small catch portion would  detract from the large quick portion’s tenderness, and so is usually cut away.  Mollusc Texture   The adductor muscles largely determine the texture of several  bivalves — especially the scallop, whose large and tender “swimming” muscle is  often the only portion served. The other bivalve bodies are eaten whole, and  include one or two adductors together with miscellaneous innards; small tubes  and thin sheets of muscle and connective tissue; soft masses of eggs, sperm, and  food particles; and a general proteinaceous mucus that lubricates and binds food
particles. Clams, mussels, and oysters are thus slick and both crunchy and tender  when raw, chewy when cooked. The greater the proportion of muscle tissue, the  chewier the mollusc.  Mollusc texture is also strongly affected by the animals’ reproductive stage. And as  they approach spawning and their bodies fill with eggs and/or sperm, the bivalves  develop a soft creaminess that cooking sets to a custard-like texture. Immediately  after spawning, the depleted tissues are thin and flabby.  Abalone, octopus, and squid meats are mainly muscle tissue with a lot of  connective-tissue collagen and a complex fiber arrangement. They’re chewy when  lightly cooked, tough when cooked to the denaturation temperature of their  collagen, around 120–130ºF/50–55ºC, and become tender with long cooking.  Mollusc Flavor   Oysters, clams, and mussels are prized for their rich, mouth-filling  taste, especially when eaten raw. We owe this savoriness to their accumulation of  internal taste-active substances as an energy reserve and to balance the external  salinity of their home waters. For osmotic balance, marine fish (and squid and  octopus) use tasteless TMAO and relatively small amounts of amino acids, while  most molluscs rely almost entirely on amino acids: in the bivalves, especially  brothy glutamic acid. And instead of storing energy in the form of fat, molluscs  accumulate other amino acids — proline, arginine, alanine, and some combined  forms — as well as glycogen, the animal version of starch, which is itself tasteless,  though it probably provides a sense of viscosity and substance, and is slowly  transformed to sweet molecules (sugar phosphates).  Because shellfish use amino acids to counteract salt concentration, the saltier the  water, the more savory the shellfish. This fact accounts for at least some of the  flavor differences among shellfish from different waters, and it is part of the  rationale for “finishing” oysters for a few weeks or months in particular locations.  Because shellfish use up their energy stores as they prepare for spawning, they  become noticeably less tasty as spawning approaches.  When molluscs are cooked, their savoriness is somewhat diminished because heat  traps some of the amino acids in the web of coagulated protein and so withholds  them from the tongue. However, heating alters and intensifies the aroma, which is  generally dominated by dimethyl sulfide, a compound formed from an odd sulfur-  containing substance (dimethyl-β-propiothetin) that molluscs accumulate from  the algae on which they feed. DMS is also a prominent aroma in canned corn and
in heated milk: one reason that oysters and clams go so well with these ingredients  in seafood soups and stews.  Choosing and Handling Molluscs   Unless they’ve already been removed from  their shell, fresh bivalves should be alive and healthy: otherwise they are likely to  have begun spoiling. A healthy bivalve has an intact shell, and its adductor muscle  is active and holds the shells tightly together, especially when sharply tapped.  Molluscs keep best on ice covered with a damp cloth, and should not be allowed  to sit in a puddle of meltwater, which is saltless and therefore fatal to sea creatures.  Clams and relatives often benefit from several hours’ immersion in a bucket of cold  salt water (   cup salt per gallon, or 20 gm/l) to clean themselves of residual sand ⅓  and grit.  When the cook wants to “shuck” an oyster or clam, or open the shell and remove  the raw meat, it’s the hinge ligament and adductor muscles that must be dealt  with. The usual technique is to wedge the blade of a small, strong knife between  the shells near the hinge, then cut through the elastic ligament. Then run the knife  along the inner surface of one shell to sever the adductor muscle(s) (clams and  mussels have two, oysters and scallops one). Remove the loose shell, and cut the  other end of the adductor(s) to free the body from the remaining shell.  Heat causes the adductor muscle to relax, which is why mollusc shells open during  cooking. Shells that don’t open may not contain a live animal and should be  discarded.  Abalone   There are about 100 species in the abalone genus   Haliotis ; they have a  single low-slung shell, and the largest grow to 12 in/30 cm and 8 lb/4 kg. In the  United States, the red abalone,   Haliotis rufescens , is now farmed in offshore cages  and onshore tanks, reaching 3.5 in/9 cm across and yielding 0.25 lb/100g meat in  about three years. Abalone meat can be quite tough, in part because they  apparently accumulate connective-tissue collagen as an energy reserve! Either  very gentle or prolonged heating is essential; the meat toughens badly when it  exceeds 120ºF/50ºC, and the collagen shrinks and compacts the tissue. Once this  happens, continued simmering will eventually dissolve the collagen into gelatin  and make the meat densely silken. Japanese cooks simmer abalone for several  hours to obtain a more savory flavor (free amino acids apparently react to form  taste-active peptides).  Clams   Clams are the burrowing bivalves. They dig themselves into ocean or river
sediments by extending a foot muscle downward, expanding its end into an  anchor, and then contracting the foot while squirting water and rocking the shell.  In order to reach the water from their burrow to breathe and feed, they have a pair  of muscular tubes or “siphons,” one for inhaling and the other for exhaling, which  may be separate or else joined together into a single “neck.”  Clam and mussel anatomy. The bulk of the clam body (left) is the muscular foot, while  the mussel body (right) is mainly a nonmuscular mantle and the digestive and  reproductive organs it encloses. The shell-closing adductor muscles are relatively  minor parts. The mussel’s “beard” is a thatch of tough protein fibers that anchor it to a  rock or other support.  The U.S. term “hard shell” is applied to sturdy clams that close completely (little-  neck, quahog), while “soft shell” clams have siphons much longer than the shell,  which is thin and always gapes (steamer, longneck). The Japanese or Manila hard-  shell clam ( Ruditapes philippinarum ) is the only one to be cultivated on a large scale  worldwide, thanks to its robustness and preference for shallow burial. The other  dozen or so common clam species are mainly regional products. Some species of  the large surf clam ( Mactromeris   species) absorb plankton pigments and have a  striking red layer on several muscles. The largest and most grotesque of the  temperate   commercial   clams is   the deep-burrowing geoduck   of the   Pacific  Northwest subtidal mudflats ( Panope generosa ), whose neck looks like a small  elephant’s trunk. Though most are 3 lb/1.5 kg, geoducks can reach 15 lb/8 kg with  a neck 3 ft/1 m long! Their burrowing and siphoning musculature makes clams  fairly chewy creatures. The tenderer portions of large clams (mantle, quick muscle)  may be cut out and prepared separately. The large geoduck neck is usually scalded  and the tough protective skin removed before the meat is sliced and/or pounded  very thin for eating raw or either gentle or prolonged cooking.
Mussels   The handful of mussel species we usually eat have become cosmopolitan:  they have hitched rides or been intentionally introduced to various parts of the  world, where they both grow naturally and are farmed and marketed at 2.5 in/6 cm  in less than two years. The Mediterranean and Atlantic species of   Mytilus   have  complementary habits; the Atlantic is in its prime in the spring and spawns in the  summer; the Mediterranean is best in summer and spawns in winter.  Mussels anchor themselves in the intertidal zone by means of a thatch of tough  proteinaceous fibers called the   byssus,   or “beard.” Where the clams have two similar  adductor muscles to close and hold the shells tightly shut, the mussel has one  large adductor at the wide end and a small one at the narrow end. The rest of the  mussel body comprises the respiratory and digestive systems and the mantle.  Sexual tissues develop throughout these systems. Coloration depends on sex, diet,  and species; orange pigments from algae and crustaceans accumulate more in  female and Atlantic mussels.  Mussels are the easiest molluscs to prepare; they tolerate some overcooking and  readily come off the shell. Both characteristics reflect the relatively small amount of  muscle tissue. Because the beard is attached to the body inside, tugging on it can  injure the animal. Beard removal should be put off until just before cooking. To  avoid toughening mussels, it’s best to cook them in a broad, shallow pan in  essentially a single layer: this allows the cook to remove the early openers so that  they don’t overcook while the others finish.  Oysters   Oysters are the most prized of the bivalves. They are the sea’s tenderest  morsels, the marine equivalent of penned veal or the fattened chicken, which just  sit and eat. Their shell-closing adductor amounts to just a tenth of the body  weight, the thin, delicate sheets of all-enclosing mantle and gills account for more  than half, and the visceral mass for a third. The oyster is a special delicacy when cut  from the shell and eaten raw. It’s big enough to make a generous morsel, has a full,  complex flavor and suggestively slippery moistness; and its delicacy is a striking  contrast to the encrusted, rocky shell.  Oyster Types   Oysters became scarce as early as the 17th century, and are now  largely farmed. A handful of the two dozen oyster species are commercially  important; they have different shapes and subtly different flavors. European flat  oysters ( Ostrea edulis ) are relatively mild with a metallic taste; Asian cupped oysters  ( Crassostrea gigas ) have melon and cucumber aromas; and Virginia cupped oysters
( Crassostrea virginica ) smell like green leaves. Though there are exceptions, most  oysters produced in Europe are the native flat, “Portuguese,” and Asian; on the east  and Gulf coasts of North America, the Virginia; and on the west coast, the Asian  and the Pacific ( Ostrea lurida ). The “Portuguese” oyster is almost certainly a race of  the Asian oyster that hitched a ride from China or Taiwan to the Iberian peninsula  in the ships of early explorers, four or five centuries ago.  Scallop and oyster anatomy. The prized portion of the scallop (left) is the large main  adductor muscle, a tender bundle of fast muscle fibers that claps the shells together to  propel the scallop away from danger. The crescent of “catch” muscle alongside it holds  the shell closed. It is rich in connective tissue and tough, and is usually cut away from  the adductor. The pink and tan reproductive tissues are prized in Europe but not in the  United States. The oyster body (right) is mainly digestive and reproductive organs  enclosed in a fleshy mantle; it’s usually eaten whole, the adductor and catch muscles  providing a crunchy chewiness.  Oyster Waters   The flavor of an oyster also depends on its home waters, which is  why it makes sense to give geographical designations to oysters. The greater the  salinity of the water, the more taste-active amino acids the oyster’s cells must  contain to balance the dissolved salt outside, and so the more savory its flavor. The  local plankton and dissolved minerals will leave distinctive traces in the animal;  and predators, currents, and exposure in the tidal zone will exercise and enlarge its  adductor muscle. Water temperature determines how rapidly the oyster grows,  and even its sex: warmth and plentiful food usually mean fast growth and  development into a plump female creamy with millions of tiny eggs; cold water  means slow growth, an indefinitely postponed sexual maturity, and a leaner,  crisper texture.
Handling and Preparing Oysters   Live oysters can survive for a week or more under  moist wraps in the refrigerator, cupped shell down. Up to a point, this holding  period can heighten their flavor, since metabolism without oxygen causes savory  succinic acid to accumulate in their tissues. Preshucked oysters are rinsed with cold  fresh water and then bottled in their subsequent secretions, which should be  mostly clear; pronounced cloudiness indicates that the oyster tissues are breaking.  Bottled oysters are often subpasteurized (heated to around 120ºF/50ºC) to delay  spoilage while mostly retaining the fresh texture and flavor.  Scallops   The scallop family includes about 400 species that range from a few  millimeters to a yard across. Most food scallops are still harvested from the ocean  floor. Large “sea scallops” (species of   Pecten   and   Placopecten ) are dredged from  deep, cold waters year-round on trips that may last weeks, while smaller “bay” and  “calico” scallops ( Argopecten ) are either dredged or hand-gathered by divers closer  to shore during a defined season.  Unlike all the other molluscs, the scallop is mostly delectably tender, sweet muscle!  This is because it’s the only bivalve that swims. It defends itself from predators by  clapping its shells together and forcing water out the hinge end, using a central  striated muscle that can be an inch/2 cm or more across and long. This adductor  muscle makes up such a large portion of the scallop’s body that it also serves as  protein and energy storage. Its sweet taste comes from large amounts of the  amino acid glycine and of glycogen, a portion of which is gradually converted by  enzymes into glucose and a related molecule (glucose 6 phosphate) when the  animal is killed.  Because their shells don’t close tightly, scallops are usually shucked soon after  harvest, with only the adductor muscle kept for the U.S. market, the adductor and  yellow and pink reproductive organs for Europe. This means that meat quality  usually begins to deteriorate long before it gets to market. On boats that go out for  more than a day, the catch may therefore be frozen and/or dipped in a solution of  polyphosphates, which the adductors absorb and retain, becoming plump and  glossy white. However, such scallops have less flavor and lose large amounts of  liquid when heated. Untreated scallops have a duller, off-white appearance with  pink or orange tones.  In the kitchen, the cook sometimes needs to separate the large, tender swimming  muscle from the adjoining, smaller, tough catch muscle that holds the two shells
shut. When sautéed, scallops quickly develop a rich brown crust thanks to their  combination of free amino acids and sugars, which undergo Maillard reactions.  Food Words:   Mollusc, Abalone, Clam, Oyster, Scallop, Squid  The general term for these hard-shelled creatures,   mollusc,   comes from the  Indo-European root   mel,   meaning “soft,” which the inner body parts indeed  are.   Abalone   entered English via Spanish from the Monterey Indian word for  this streamlined snail,   aulun. Clam   began in the Indo-European   gel,   a compact  mass:   cloud, cling,   and   clamp   are its linguistic relatives.   Mussel   derives from the  Indo-European   mus,   meaning both “mouse” and “muscle,” which moves  quickly like a mouse under the skin. Since mussels hardly move at all, their  dark, oblong shapes must have suggested the comparison.   Oyster,   from the  Indo-European   ost,   “bone,” names the mollusc with the heavy and bone-  colored shell.   Scallop,   with its unusually symmetrical and patterned valves,  comes via the Middle French   escalope , from a Germanic word for “shell.” And  squid ? To date, the linguists are stumped. It appeared out of nowhere in the  17th century.  Squid, Cuttlefish, Octopus   The   cephalopod   group are the most advanced of the  molluscs, with their mantle turned into a muscular body wall and the remnants of  their shell within (the term means “head-foot”: the foot muscle is near the head).  The octopus, species of   Octopus   and   Cistopus,   has eight arms clustered around its  mouth with which it clambers along the bottom and seizes prey; the coastal-  bottom cuttlefish (species of   Sepia ) and open-ocean squid (species of   Loligo,  Todarodes, Ilex ) have short arms and two long tentacles.  Cephalopod Texture   The muscle fibers of squid and octopus are extremely thin —  less than a tenth the diameter of a typical fiber in a fish or steer (0.004 mm, vs.  0.05–0.1 mm) — which makes the flesh dense and fine-textured. They’re arrayed in  multiple   layers,   and   greatly   reinforced   with   strengthening   and   toughening  connective-tissue collagen, some three to five times more than fish muscle has.  Unlike the fragile collagen of fish, squid and octopus collagen is extensively cross-  linked and behaves more like the collagen of meat animals.
Like the abalone and clam, squid and octopus must be cooked either barely and  briefly to prevent the muscle fibers from toughening, or for a long time to break  down the collagen. Cooked quickly to 130–135ºF/55–57ºC, their flesh is moist and  almost crisp. At 140ºF/60ºC it curls and shrinks as the collagen layers contract and  squeeze moisture from the muscle fibers. Continued gentle simmering for an hour  or more will dissolve the tough, contracted collagen into gelatin and give the flesh  a silken succulence. Pounding can also help disorganize and thus tenderize  mantles and arms.  The anatomy of the squid mantle. This main portion of the squid body consists of an  envelope of muscle that propels the animal by contracting and squeezing water  through a small opening. The mantle muscle is built up from tough connective tissue  and alternating rings of muscle fibers, some oriented across the mantle wall and some  along it.  Cephalopod Flavor and Ink   Like finfish, squid and octopus maintain their osmotic  balance largely with the tasteless TMAO (p. 188) rather than with free amino acids.  Their flesh is therefore less sweet and savory than that of the other molluscs, and  can turn fishy when bacteria convert TMAO to TMA.  Cephalopod ink is a bag of pigment that the animal can squirt into the water when
endangered. It’s a heat-stable mix of phenolic compounds (animal cousins of the  phenolic complexes that discolor cut fruits and vegetables; p. 269), and cooks use  it to color stews and pastas a dark brown.  Other Invertebrates: Sea Urchins  Spiny sea urchins are members of the animal group called   echinoderms   (Greek for  “prickly skin”), which may account for 90% of the biomass on deep-sea floors.  There are about a half dozen commercial species of sea urchins with average  diameters of 2.5–5 in/6–12 cm. They’re almost entirely enclosed in a sphere of  mineralized plates covered with protective spines, and are collected mainly for  their golden, creamy, richly flavored reproductive tissues, which can account for up  to two-thirds of the internal tissues. Both testes and ovaries are prized, and are  hard to tell apart. Sea-urchin gonads average 15–25% fat and 2–3% savory amino  acids, peptides, and IMP. In Japan, sea urchins are eaten raw in sushi or salted and  fermented into a savory paste; in France they’re added to scrambled eggs, soufflés,  fish soups and sauces, and sometimes poached whole.  Preserved Fish and Shellfish  Few foods go bad faster than fish. And until recently, few people in the world had  the chance to eat fresh fish. Before refrigeration and motorized transportation  became common, fish were harvested in such numbers and spoiled so rapidly that  most had to be preserved by drying, salting, smoking, fermenting, or some  combination of these antimicrobial treatments. Preserved forms of fish are still  important and appreciated in most parts of the world, especially in Europe and  Asia. It’s true that their flavor is much more assertive than the mild fresh fish that  are now the U.S. standard. But preserved fish aren’t just an inferior relic of  preindustrial necessity. They can be a delicious alternative, and they offer a taste of  history.  Dried Fish  Drying foods in the sun and wind is an ancient method of preservation. Fresh fish  is about 80% water; below 25%, bacteria have trouble growing, and below 15%  molds do too. Happily, dehydration also intensifies and alters flavor by disrupting
cellular   structure   and   so   promoting   enzyme   action,   and   by   concentrating  flavorsome molecules to the point that they begin to react with each other to form  additional layers of flavor. Very lean fish and shellfish are the usual choice, since air-  drying will inevitably cause fat oxidation and some development of rancid flavors.  Fatty fish are usually smoked, or salt-cured in closed containers to minimize  rancidity. Often drying is preceded by salting and/or cooking, which draw moisture  from the fish and make their surfaces less hospitable to spoilage microbes during  the drying proper.  China and Southeast Asia are the largest producers and consumers of dried fish  and shellfish. Cooks there use dried shrimp as is, either whole or ground, to season  various dishes; they steam and shred dried scallops before adding them to soups;  they reconstitute tough abalone, octopus, squid, jellyfish, and sea cucumber by  soaking in water, then simmer them until tender. They do the same with shark fins,  which give a gelatinous thickness to soups.  Stockfish   Perhaps the best known dried fish in the West is the Scandinavian  stockfish, which traditionally has been cod, ling, or their relatives, freeze-dried for  several weeks on rocky beaches along the cold, windy coasts of Norway, Iceland,  and Sweden. The result is a hard, light slab that’s nearly all protein and has a  pronounced, almost gamy flavor when cooked. Today, stockfish is mechanically air-  dried for two to three months at 40–50ºF/5–10ºC. Stockfish fanciers in Scandinavia  and the Mediterranean region reconstitute the woody mass in water for from one  to several days, with frequent changes to prevent bacterial growth. The skin is then  removed and the fish gently simmered, then served in pieces, in boneless flakes, or  else pounded into a paste, and with a variety of enrichments and flavorings: in the  north, often butter and mustard; in the Mediterranean, olive oil and garlic.  Alkaline Fish:   Lutefisk  Distinctly alkaline foods are rare and have a slippery, soapy quality that takes  getting used to. (Alkalinity is the chemical opposite of acidity.) Egg white is  one such food, and another is   lutefisk , a peculiar Norwegian and Swedish way  of preparing stockfish that probably began in late medieval times, and that  gives it a jiggly, jelly-like consistency.   Lutefisk   is made by soaking the partly
reconstituted dry cod for a day or more in a water solution that is strongly  alkaline, originally from the addition of potash (the carbonate- and mineral-  rich ashes from a wood fire), sometimes lime (calcium carbonate), and later  lye (pure sodium hydroxide, at the rate of about 5 grams per liter water).  These strong alkaline substances cause the proteins in the muscle fibers to  accumulate a positive electrical charge and repel each other. When the fish is  then simmered in the usual way (after several days of rinsing to remove  excess lye), the fiber proteins bind to each other only weakly.  Salted Fish  Preservation by natural drying works well in cold and hot climates. Temperate  Europe, where fish generally spoil before they can dry sufficiently, developed the  habit of salting fish first, or instead. A day’s salting would preserve many fish for  several days more, long enough to be carried inland, while saturating the fish with  around 25% salt keeps it stable for a year. Lean cod and relatives were salted and  then air-dried, while fatty herring and their ilk were guarded from air-induced  rancidity by immersing them in barrels of brine, or by subsequent smoking. The  best of these are the piscatory equivalent of salt-cured hams. In both, salt buys  time for transformation: it preserves them long and gently enough for enzymes of  both fish and harmless salt-tolerant bacteria to break down flavorless proteins and  fats into savory fragments, which then react further to create flavors of great  complexity.  It’s hard to draw a clear distinction between salted and fermented fish. Bacteria  play some role even in hard-cured cod; and most fish fermentations start with a  salting to control the bacterial population and activity. Most salted cod, herring,  and anchovy products are not generally thought of as fermented, so I’ll describe  them in this section.  Salt Cod   Bountiful cod was one resource that attracted Europeans to the New  World, where the standard treatment was to split and salt the fish, and lay them  out on rocks or racks to dry for several weeks. Nowadays cod may be hard-cured  for 15 days to saturate the flesh with salt (25%), then held without drying for  months. During that time,   Micrococcus   bacteria generate flavor by producing free
amino acids and TMA; and oxygen breaks up to half the very small amount of fatty  substances into free fatty acids and then into a range of smaller molecules that  also contribute to aroma. The final artificial drying takes less than three days.  Salt cod remains a popular food around the Mediterranean as well as in the  Caribbean and Africa, where it was introduced during the slave trade. Scandinavia  and Canada are still the largest producers. White pieces are preferred to yellowish  or reddish ones, the colors being indicators of oxidized or microbial off-flavors.  Cooks first reconstitute and desalt it by soaking it for hours to days in several  changes of water. Perhaps the best-known preparation is the Provençal   brandade,  a paste made by pounding the shredded poached fish along with olive oil, milk,  garlic, and sometimes potato.  Salt Herring   Herring and their relatives may be up to 20% fat by weight, and are  therefore susceptible to becoming rancid when exposed to the air. Medieval  fishermen solved this problem by barreling the fish in brine, where they would  keep for as much as a year. Then sometime around 1300, the Dutch and northern  Germans developed a quick gutting technique that left in place a portion of the  intestine rich in digestive enzymes (the pyloric caecum). During one to four  months of curing in a moderate brine (16–20% salt), these enzymes circulate and  supplement the activity of both muscle and skin enzymes, breaking down proteins  to create a tender, luscious texture and a wonderfully complex flavor, at once fishy,  meaty, and cheesy. Such herring are eaten as is, without desalting or cooking.  Two particularly prized types of cured herring are the lightly salted Dutch   groen  and   maatjes,   or “green” and “maiden” herring, which traditionally broke the winter-  long diet of hard-cured beef and fish. Because all lightly cured fish must now be  prefrozen to rid them of parasites (p. 186), these formerly seasonal delicacies are  now made and enjoyed year-round.  Cured Anchovies   Anchovies, smaller and more southerly relatives of the herring,  are cured in and around the Mediterranean to make that region’s version of flavor-  enhancing fish sauce (see box, p. 235). The fish are headed and gutted, then  layered with enough salt to saturate their tissue. This mass is then weighted down  and held for six to ten months at a relatively high temperature, between 60 and  86ºF/15–30ºC. The fish can then be sold as is, or the fillets repacked in cans or  bottles, or ground and mixed with oil or butter into a paste. Enzymes from the  muscle, skin, blood cells, and bacteria generate many flavor components; and their
concentration, together with the warm curing temperature, encourages early  stages of the browning reactions, which generate another range of aromatic  molecules. The result is a remarkably full flavor that includes fruity, fatty, fried,  cucumbery, floral, sweet, buttery, meaty, popcorn, mushroom, and malty notes.  This concentrated complexity, together with the way that the cured flesh readily  disintegrates in a dish, has led cooks from the 16th century on to use anchovies as  a general flavor enhancer in sauces and other dishes.  Gravlax and Lox   Gravlax originated in medieval Scandinavia as a lightly salted,  pressed form of salmon that was preserved by fermentation (p. 235) and had a  strong smell. By the 18th century, it had evolved into a lightly salted and pressed  but unfermented dish. This new gravlax had a subtle flavor, a dense, silken texture  that makes it possible to cut very thin slices, and a glistening, translucent  appearance. This refined version of gravlax has become popular in many countries.  Modern recipes for gravlax call for widely varying amounts of salt, sugar, and time.  Fresh dill is now the standard flavoring, probably a domestic replacement for the  original pine needles, which are a delightful alternative. The salt, sugar, and  flavoring are sprinkled evenly over all surfaces of salmon fillets, the fillets are  weighted down, and the container refrigerated for one to four days. The weighting  provides intimate contact between flesh and flavorings, presses excess fluid from  the fish, and compacts the flesh. Salt dissolves the major contracting protein  myosin in the muscle fibers, and thus gives the flesh its compact tenderness.  Lox, most familiar as a delicatessen accompaniment to the bagel, is a heavily  brined form of salmon. It’s usually soaked to remove some salt before being sliced  for sale.  Fermented Fish  Many cultures from the Arctic to the tropics have recruited microbes to grow on  fish   and   transform   their   texture   and   flavor.   But   the   world   center   of   fish  fermentation is eastern Asia, where it has served two important purposes: to  preserve and put to use the large numbers of small fish that inhabit the coastal  and inland waters; and to provide a concentrated source of appetite-stimulating  flavors — above all the savory monosodium glutamate and other amino acids —  for a diet dominated by bland rice.  Fish fermentation apparently arose several thousand years ago in the freshwaters
of southwest China and the Mekong River region. It then spread to the coastal  deltas and was applied to ocean fish. Two broadly different techniques evolved:  simply salting a mass of small fish or fish parts and allowing it to ferment; and  salting larger fish lightly, then embedding them in a fermenting mass of rice or  other grains, vegetables, or fruits. In the simple fermentation, the proportion of salt  is usually enough by itself to preserve the fish from spoilage, and bacteria are  important mainly as flavor modifiers. But in the mixed fermentation, a smaller dose  of salt preserves the fish for just a few weeks while the plant-based ingredients  feed the same microbes that sour milk or turn grape juice into wine. The fish is  then preserved by the microbes’ acids or alcohol, and flavored by the many by-  products of their growth.  From these simple principles, Asian peoples have developed dozens of distinctive  fermented fish products, and Europeans a handful. These include the original  sushi, which was not a pristinely fresh piece of fish on mildly vinegared rice! Here  I’ll describe some of the more common ones.  Asian Fish Pastes and Sauces   Asian fermented fish pastes and sauces are vital  manifestations of a preparation that has mostly disappeared in Europe but was  once well known as   garum   or   liquamen,   the fish sauce of Rome (see box, p. 235).  (Modern ketchup, a sweet-sour tomato condiment, owes its name to   kecap,   an  Indonesian salty fish condiment.) Fish sauces play the same role that soy sauces do  in regions where soy doesn’t grow well, and were probably the original model for  soy sauce.  Fish pastes and sauces are two phases of the same simple preparation. A mass of  fish or shellfish is mixed with salt to give an overall salt concentration between  10% and 30%, and sealed in a closed container for from one month (for pastes) to  24 months (for sauces). Fish pastes tend to have relatively strong fish and cheese  notes, while the more thoroughly transformed fish sauces are more meaty and  savory. The most prized fish sauces come from the first tapping of the mass; after  boiling, flavoring, and/or aging, they play the lead role in dipping sauces. Second-  quality sauces from re-extraction of the mass may be supplemented with caramel,  molasses, or roasted rice, and are used in cooking to add depth to the flavor of a  complex dish.
Some Asian Fermented Fish Products  This chart gives an idea of the great variety of fermented fish condiments  made in Asia.  Country  Fish Pieces or  Paste   Fish Sauce  Sour-Fermented  (carbohydrate source)  Thailand   Kapi (usually  shrimp)  Nam-plaa   Plaa-som (cooked rice)  Plaa-raa (roasted rice)  Plaa-chao (fermented rice)  Plaa-mum (papaya, galangal)  Khem-bak-nad (pineapple)  Vietnam   Mam   Nuoc mam  Korea   Jeot-kal   Jeot-kuk   Sikhae (millet, malt, chilli, garlic)  Japan   Shiokara (squid,  fish viscera)  Shottsuru   Narezushi (cooked rice)  Ika-shoyu (squid  viscera)  Kasuzuke (cooked rice, sake  wine sediments)  Philippines   Bagoong   Patis   Burong isda (cooked rice)  Indonesia   Pedah   Bekasam (roasted rice)  Trassi (shrimp)   Makassar (rice fermented with  red-pigmented yeast)  Malaysia   Belacan (shrimp)   Budu (anchovy)   Pekasam (roasted rice,  tamarind)  Kecap ikan  (other fish)  Cincaluk (shrimp, cooked rice)
Garum : The Original Anchovy Paste  One of the defining flavors of the ancient world was a fermented fish sauce  variously called garos   (Greece),   garum,   and   liquamen   (Rome). According to the  Roman natural historian Pliny, “garum consists of the guts of fish and other  parts that would otherwise be considered refuse, so that garum is really the  liquor from putrefaction.” Despite its origins and no doubt powerful aroma,  Pliny noted that “scarcely any other liquid except perfume has become more  highly valued”; the best, from mackerel only, came from Roman outposts in  Spain. Garum was made by salting the fish innards, letting the mixture  ferment in the sun for several months until the flesh had mostly fallen apart,  and then straining the brown liquid. It was used as an ingredient in cooked  dishes and as a sauce at the table, sometimes mixed with wine or vinegar  ( oenogarum, oxygarum ). Some form of garum is called for in nearly every  savory recipe in the late Roman recipe collection attributed to Apicius.  Preparations like garum persisted in the Mediterranean through the 16th  century, then died out as the modern-day, solid version of garum rose to  prominence: salt-cured but innard-free anchovies.  Sour Fish: The   Original   Sushi and   Gravlax   There   are   remarkable   parallel  traditions in Asia and Scandinavia in which fish are stored with carbohydrate-rich  foods that bacteria ferment to produce acids that preserve the fish. These  traditions have given birth to more widely popular but unfermented preparations:  sushi   and   gravlax.  Asian Mixtures of Rice and Fish   Of the many Asian fermentations that mix fish and  grains, one of the most influential has been the Japanese   narezushi,   the original  form of modern sushi (p. 207). The best-known version is   funa-zushi,   made with  rice and goldfish carp ( Carassius auratus ) from Lake Biwa, north of Kyoto. Various  bacteria consume the rice carbohydrates and produce a range of organic acids  that protect against spoilage, soften the head and backbone, and contribute to the  characteristic tart and rich flavor, which has vinegary, buttery, and cheesy notes. In  modern sushi, made with pristinely fresh raw fish, the tartness of   narezushi  survives through the addition of vinegar to the rice.
Scandinavian   Buried   Fish:   Gravlax   According   to   food   ethnologist   Astri  Riddervold, Scandinavian fermented fishes — the original   gravlax,   Swedish   surlax  and   sursild,   Norwegian   rakefisk   and   rakørret   — were probably the result of a simple  dilemma facing medieval fisherman at remote rivers, lakes, and coastlines, who  landed many fish but had little salt and few barrels. The solution was to salt the  cleaned fish lightly and bury them where they had been caught, in a hole in the  ground, perhaps wrapped in birch bark:   gravlax   means “buried salmon.” The low  summer temperature of the far northern earth, the airlessness, minimal salt, and  added carbohydrates (from the bark, or from whey, malted barley, or flour), all  conspired to encourage a lactic fermentation that acidified the fish surface. And  enzymes from the fish muscle and the bacteria broke protein and fish oil down to  produce a buttery texture and powerful, sharp, cheesy smell: the   sur   in   sursild   and  surlax   means “sour.”  Modern, unfermented gravlax is made by dry-salting salmon fillets for a few days  at refrigerator temperatures (p. 233).  Lightly Salted, Strong-Smelling Fish:   Surstrømming  Fish pastes and sauces are cured with enough salt to limit the growth and activity of  microbes. There are also fish fermentations that involve far less salt, so that bacteria  thrive and have a far more powerful influence on flavor. One notorious example is  Swedish   Surstrømming.   Herring are fermented in barrels for one to two months,  then sealed in cans and allowed to continue for as much as another year. The cans  swell, which is normally a warning sign for the growth of botulism bacteria, but for  surstrømming   a sign of promising flavor development. The unusual bacteria  responsible for ripening in the can are species of   Haloanaerobium,   which produce  hydrogen and carbon dioxide gases, hydrogen sulfide, and butyric, propionic, and  acetic acids: in effect a combination of rotten eggs, rancid Swiss cheese, and  vinegar, overlaid onto the basic fish flavor!  Smoked Fish  The smoking of fish may have begun with fishermen drying their catch over a fire  when sun, wind, and salt were inadequate. Certainly many familiar smoked fishes
come from cool northern nations: smoked herring from Germany, Holland, and  Britain, cod and haddock from Britain, sturgeon from Russia, salmon from Norway,  Scotland, and Nova Scotia (the origin of the “Nova” salmon found in delicatessens),  and smoked skipjack from Japan. It turned out that smoke imparts a flavor that can  mask stale fishiness, and it helps preserve both the fish and its own flavor; the  many   chemicals   generated   by   burning   wood   have   both   antimicrobial   and  antioxidant properties (p. 449). Traditional smoking treatments were extreme; the  medieval Yarmouth red herring was left ungutted, saturated with salt and then  smoked for several weeks, leaving it capable of lasting as long as a year, but also  odiferous enough to become a byword for establishing — or covering up — a  scent trail. When rail transport reduced the time from production to market in the  19th century, both salt and smoke cures became much milder. Today salt contents  are kept around or under 3%, the salinity of seawater, and smoking is limited to a  few hours, contributing flavor and extending the shelf life of refrigerated fish for a  matter of days or weeks. Much modern smoked fish and shellfish is preserved in  cans!  Preliminary Salting and Drying   Nowadays, fish destined for the smoker are  generally soaked in a strong brine for a few hours to days, long enough to pick up  a little salt (a few percent, not enough to inhibit microbial spoilage). This also  draws to the surface some of the proteins in the muscle fiber, notably myosin.  When the fish is hung and allowed to drip dry, the sticky layer of dissolved myosin  on the surface forms a shiny gel or   pellicle   that will give the smoked fish an  attractive golden sheen. (The gold color is created by browning reactions between  aldehydes in the smoke and amino acids in the pellicle, as well as condensation of  dark resins from the smoke vapor.)  Cold and Hot Smoking   The initial smoking (often using sawdust, which can  produce more smoke at a lower temperature than intact wood) takes place at a  relatively cool temperature around 85ºF/30ºC, which avoids hardening the surface  and forming a barrier to moisture movement from the interior. This also allows the  fish flesh to lose some moisture and become denser without being cooked, which  would denature connective-tissue collagen and cause the fish to fall apart. Finally,  the fish is smoked for several hours in one of two temperature ranges. In cold  smoking, the temperature remains below 90ºF/32ºC, and the fish retains its  delicate raw texture. In hot smoking, the fish is essentially cooked in air at  temperatures that gradually rise and approach the boiling point; it reaches an
internal temperature of 150–170ºF/65–75ºC fairly quickly, and has a cohesive yet  dry, flaky texture. Fish smoked cold and long can keep for as long as a couple of  months in the refrigerator, while a light smoking, hot or cold, will only keep the fish  for a few days or weeks.  Fine smoked salmon may be treated with salt and sometimes sugar for a few hours  to a few days, then rinsed, air-dried, and cold-smoked for anywhere from five to 36  hours, with the temperature rising from 85º to 100ºF/30º to 40ºC toward the end to  bring some glossy oil to the surface.  Smoked Fish Terminology  Kippered herring   Herring, gutted and split, cold-  smoked  Bloater, bokking   Herring, whole, cold-smoked  Buckling   Herring, whole, hot-smoked  Sild   Herring, immature, whole, hot-  smoked  Red herring   Herring, gutted, unsplit, cold-  smoked  Brisling   Sprat, immature, whole, hot-  smoked  Finnan haddie   Haddock, gutted, split, cold-  smoked (peat)  Norwegian/Scotch smoked salmon;  “Nova”   Salmon fillets, cold-smoked  Four-Way Preservation: Japanese Katsuobushi  The most remarkable preserved fish is   katsuobushi,   a cornerstone of Japanese  cooking, which dates from around 1700 and is made most often from one fish, the  skip-jack tuna   Katsuwonus pelamis.   The fish’s musculature is cut away from the
body in several pieces, which are gently boiled in salt water for about an hour, and  their skin removed. Next, they undergo a routine of daily hot-smoking above a  hardwood fire until they have fully hardened. This stage lasts 10 to 20 days. Then  the pieces are inoculated with one or more of several different molds (species of  Aspergillus, Eurotium, Penicillium ), sealed in a box, and allowed to ferment on their  surface for about two weeks. After a day or two of sun-drying, the mold is scraped  off; this molding process is repeated three or four times. At the end, after a total of  three to five months, the meat has turned light brown and dense; when struck, it’s  said to sound like a resonant piece of wood.  Why go to all this trouble? Because it accumulates a spectrum of flavor molecules  whose breadth is approached only in the finest cured meats and cheeses. From the  fish muscle itself and its enzymes come lactic acid and savory amino acids,  peptides, and nucleotides; from the smoking come pungent phenolic compounds;  from the boiling, smoking, and sun-drying come the roasted, meaty aromas of  nitrogen- and sulfur-containing carbon rings; and from the mold’s attack on fish fat  come many flowery, fruity, green notes.  Katsuobushi is to the Japanese tradition what a concentrated veal stock is to the  French: a convenient flavor base for many soups and sauces. It contributes its  months of flavor-making in a matter of moments in the form of fine shavings. For  the basic broth called   dashi,   cold water is brought just to the boil with a piece of  kombu seaweed, which is then removed. The katsuobushi shavings are added, the  liquid brought again to the boil, and poured off the shavings the moment they  absorb enough water to fall to the bottom. The broth’s delicate flavor is spoiled by  prolonged steeping or pressing the shavings.  Marinated Fish  In chemical terms, an acid is a substance that readily releases free protons, the  small reactive nuclei of hydrogen atoms. Water is a weak acid, and living cells are  designed to operate while bathed in it. But strong acids flood living cells with more  protons than they can handle, and cripple their chemical machinery. This is why  acids are good at preserving foods: they cripple microbes. In the case of acidifying  fish, a happy side benefit is that it leaves the fish with a distinctive, almost fresh  aroma. Acid conditions cause heavy-smelling aldehydes, which accentuate the  fishiness of TMA, to react with water molecules and become nonvolatile, so that
lighter alcohols dominate the aroma. Pickled herring and other fish can be  surprisingly delicate.  As   the   recipe   from   Apicius   shows   (see   box   below),   inhabitants   of   the  Mediterranean region have been marinating fish for thousands of years. The  common modern term,   escabeche   and variants on it, derives from the Arabic  sikbaj,   which in the 13th century named meat and fish dishes with vinegar (acetic  acid, p. 772) added toward the end of the preparation. Other acidic liquids were  also used, including wine and verjuice, the juice of unripe grapes.  Fish and shellfish can be marinated in acid either raw or after an initial salting or  cooking. In northern Europe, for example, raw herring are immersed in marinade (3  parts fish to 2 parts of a 10% salt, 6% acetic acid mixture) for up to a week, at a  temperature   around   50ºF/10ºC;   while   for   marinated   Japanese   mackerel  ( shimesaba ) the fillets are first dry-salted for a day, then immersed in vinegar for a  day. In the case of precooked fish, the initial heat treatment kills bacteria and firms  texture,   so   the   subsequent   marination   is   a   milder   one,   and   there   is   less  development of texture and flavor.  Canned Fish  Because canned fish keep indefinitely without refrigeration and in a handy  package, this is the preserved fish that most of us eat most often. In the United  States, it is the most popular of all fish products: we consume more than a billion  cans of tuna every year. Fish and shellfish were first heated in a hermetically sealed  container around 1810 by Nicholas Appert, principal inventor of the process.  Fellow Frenchman Joseph Colin started canning sardines a little over a decade  later; American fishermen canned oysters in Delaware around 1840 and Pacific  salmon around 1865, and Italian immigrants founded the canned tuna industry  around San Diego in 1903. Today, salmon, tuna, and sardines are the most popular  canned seafoods worldwide.  Most canned fish are heated twice: once before the cans are sealed, to cause the  inevitable cooking losses and allow the moisture (as well as flavor and healthful  oils) to be drained away, so that the can contents won’t be watery; and once after  the cans are sealed to sterilize the contents, usually under pressurized steam at  about 240ºF/115ºC. This second treatment is sufficient to soften fish bones, so fish  canned with its bones is an excellent source of calcium (fresh fish contains about 5
milligrams of calcium per 4 oz/100 g; canned salmon contains 200 to 250). A  number of additives are permitted in canned fish, particularly tuna, to improve  flavor and appearance. These include monosodium glutamate and various forms  of hydrolyzed protein, which are proteins broken down into savory amino acids  (including glutamate). Premium canned fish is cooked only once, in the container,  retaining its juices, and needs no improvement by additives.  Ancient Escabeche  To make fried fish keep longer. The moment that they are fried and  lifted from the pan, pour hot vinegar over them.  — Apicius, first few centuries   CE  Fish Eggs  Of all foods from the waters, the most expensive and luxurious are fish eggs.  Caviar, the salted roe of the sturgeon, is the animal kingdom’s truffle: a remarkable  food that has become increasingly rare as civilization has encroached on its wild  source. Happily, sturgeon farms are now producing good caviar, and a variety of  other fish eggs are available as affordable and interesting alternatives.  The ovaries or “roes” of fish accumulate vast numbers of eggs in preparation for  spawning: as many as 20,000 in a single salmon, and several million in a sturgeon,  carp, or shad. Because fish eggs contain all the nutrients that one cell will need to  grow into a hatchling, they’re often a more concentrated form of nourishment  than the fish itself, with more fat (between 10 and 20% in sturgeon and salmon  caviars) and large quantities of savory building-block amino acids and nucleic  acids. They often contain attractive pigments, sometimes bright pink or yellow  carotenoids, sometimes camouflaging brown-black melanins.  The best roes for both cooking and salting are neither very immature nor fully ripe:  immature eggs are small and hard and have little flavor; eggs ready for spawning  are soft, easily crushed, and quick to develop off-flavors. Roes consist of separate  eggs barely held together in a dilute protein solution and enclosed in a thin, fragile
membrane. They can be easier to handle in the kitchen if they’re first briefly  poached to coagulate the protein solution and give them a firmer consistency.  Male fish accumulate sperm to release into the water when the females release  their eggs. The sperm mass is called white roe, milt, or   laitance,   and is creamy  rather than granular (the sperm cells suspended in the proteinaceous fluid are  microscopic). Sea bream and cod milts are prized in Japan, where they’re cooked  gently to a delicate custard-like consistency.  A salmon egg. Like the chicken egg, the inner yolk is surrounded by a protein-rich  fluid, and contains fatty materials, including fat-soluble carotenoid pigments, and the  living egg cell.  Salt Transforms Egg Flavor and Texture  Heavy Salting:   Bottarga   Fish eggs are more frequently consumed salted than  they are fresh. Originally, salting was simply a means of preserving the eggs. For  millennia in the Mediterranean, whole mullet and tuna ovaries have been dry-  salted, pressed, and dried to make what’s now best known as   bottarga   (there are  almost identical Asian versions). The salting and drying cause a concentration of  amino acids, fatty materials, and sugars, which react with each other in the  complex browning reactions to darken the color to a deep red-brown and  generate rich, fascinating flavors reminiscent of parmesan cheese and even  tropical fruits! Bottarga is now a delicacy, sliced paper-thin and served as an  antipasto, or grated onto plain hot pasta.
Commonly Eaten Fish Eggs  Source   Qualities, Names  Carp   Very small, light pink; sometimes salted Greece:   tarama  Cod,  pollack  Very small, pink, sometimes salted, pressed, dried, smoked  Japan:   ajitsuki, tarako, momijiko  Flying fish   Small, yellow, often dyed orange or black, crunchy Japan:   tobiko  Grey  mullet  Small; often salted; pressed and dried for   bottarga   Italy:  bottarga,   Greece:   tarama ; Japan:   karasumi  Herring   Medium, yellow-gold, sometimes salt-cured; prized in Japan  when attached to kelp Japan:   kazunoko  Lumpfish   Small, fish common in North Atlantic and Baltic; greenish eggs  often dyed red or black, heavily salted, pasteurized, bottled  Salmon   Large (4–5 mm) red-orange eggs mainly from chum salmon  ( Oncorhynchus keta ), usually lightly brined and sold fresh Japan:  whole ovary   sujiko,   separated eggs   ikura  Shad   Small, from herring relative  Sturgeon   Medium-sized; lightly salted to make caviar  Trout   Large yellow eggs from Great Lakes trout  Tuna   Small; often salted; pressed and dried for   bottarga   Italy:   bottarga  Whitefish   Small, golden, crunchy, from freshwater cousins of salmon in  Northern Hemisphere; often flavored or smoked  Light Salting: Caviar   It turned out that salting has even more to offer when  applied sparingly to loose, moist fish eggs. A small dose of salt triggers the action  of   protein-digesting   enzymes   in   the   egg,   which   boost   the   levels   of   taste-  stimulating free amino acids. It also triggers another enzyme (transglutaminase)  that cross-links proteins in the outer egg membrane and helps toughen it, thus  giving the egg more texture. By generating a brine that gets drawn into the space  between the outer and yolk membranes, salt plumps the egg, making it rounder  and firmer. And by changing the distribution of electrical charges on the proteins
within, it causes the proteins to bond to each other and thicken the watery egg  fluids to a honey-like luxuriousness.  In sum, a light salting transforms fish eggs from a mere pleasant mouthful into the  remarkable food known as caviar: a fleeting taste of the primordial brine and the  savory molecules from which all life springs.  Caviar  Caviar appears to have arisen in Russia sometime around 1200   CE   as a more  palatable alternative to the traditional preserved sturgeon ovaries. Though the  term   caviar   is now widely used to describe any sort of lightly salted loose fish eggs,  for many centuries it referred only to loose sturgeon eggs. The most sought-after  caviar still comes from a handful of sturgeon species mainly harvested by Russian  and Iranian fishermen as the fish enter the rivers that drain into the Caspian Sea.  Just 150 years ago, sturgeon were common in many large rivers the northern  hemisphere, and caviar was plentiful enough in Russia that Elena Molokhovets  suggested using it to clarify bouillons and to decorate sauerkraut “so that it  appears as if it were strewn with poppy seeds”! But overfishing, dams and  hydroelectric plants, and industrial pollution have since put many sturgeon species  in danger of extinction. Around 1900, sturgeon roe became rare, expensive, and  therefore a sought-after luxury — and so even more expensive. The trend has  continued, with Caspian sturgeon populations plummeting and U.N. organizations  considering an export ban on caviar from the region. In recent decades, caviar  production has been growing further east, along the Amur River in both Russia  and China, and on sturgeon farms in the United States and elsewhere.  Making Caviar   In traditional caviar-making, sturgeon are captured alive in nets,  stunned, and their roe sacs removed before they are killed and butchered. The  caviar maker passes the roe through screens to loosen the eggs and separate them  from the ovary membrane, sorts and grades the eggs, and then dry-salts and mixes  them by hand for two to four minutes to obtain a final salt concentration between  3 and 10%. (Small amounts of alkaline borax [sodium borate] have been used since  the 1870s to replace part of the salt, making the caviar taste sweeter and  improving its shelf life, but the United States and some other countries forbid  borax in their imports.) The eggs are allowed to drain for 5 to 15 minutes, filled into  large cans, and chilled to 26ºF/–3ºC (the salt prevents freezing at this temperature).
The most highly prized caviar is the most perishable. It goes by the Russian term  malossol,   which   means   “little   salt,”   and   ranges   from   2.5–3.5%   salt.   The  classicCaspian caviars have distinctive sizes, colors, and flavors. Beluga is the rarest,  largest, and most expensive. Osetra, the most common wild caviar, comes mainly  from the Black and Azov seas, is tinged with brown, and has a flavor reminiscent of  oysters. Sevruga caviar is dark and has a less complicated flavor. “Pressed caviar” is  a relatively inexpensive, saltier (to 7%), strong-tasting paste made from overmature  eggs, and can be frozen.  Salmon and Other Caviars   Russia pioneered the development of salmon caviar in  the 1830s, and it’s a delicious and affordable alternative, with its striking red-pink  translucence and large grains. The separated eggs of chum and pink salmons are  soaked in saturated brine for 2 to 20 minutes to achieve a final salt level of 3.5–4%,  then drained and dried for up to 12 hours. Lumpfish caviar dates from the 1930s,  when the sevruga-sized eggs of this otherwise little-used fish were salted and  dyed to imitate the real thing. Whitefish eggs are similar in size and left undyed to  retain their golden color. In recent years, the roe of herring, anchovy, and even  lobster have been used to make caviars. Caviars may be pasteurized (120–  160ºF/50–70ºC for 1–2 hours) to prolong their shelf life, but this can produce a  rubbery off-aroma and chewy texture.  Object 4
Edible Plants: An Introduction to Fruits and  Vegetables, Herbs and Spices  We turn now from milk, eggs, meats, and fish, all expressions of animating protein  and energizing fat, and enter the very different world that sustains them and us  alike.   The   plant   world   encompasses   earthy   roots,   bitter   and   pungent   and  refreshing leaves, perfumed flowers, mouth-filling fruits, nutty seeds, sweetness  and tartness and astringency and pleasing pain, and aromas by the thousands! It  turns out that this exuberantly diverse world was born of simple, harsh necessity.  Plants can’t move as animals do. In order to survive their immobile, exposed  condition, they became virtuosic chemists. They construct themselves from the  simplest materials of the earth itself, water and rock and air and light, and thus  transform the earth into food on which all animal life depends. Plants deter  enemies and attract friends with colors, tastes, and scents, all chemical inventions  that have shaped our ideas of beauty and deliciousness. And they protect  themselves from the common chemical stresses of living with substances that  protect us as well. So when we eat vegetables and fruits and grains and spices, we  eat the foods that made us possible, and that opened our life to a kaleidoscopic  world of sensation and delight.  Human beings have always been plant eaters. For a million years and more, our  omnivorous ancestors foraged and lived on a wide range of wild fruits, leaves, and  seeds. Beginning around 10,000 years ago they domesticated a few grains, seed  legumes, and tubers, which are among the richest sources of energy and protein in  the plant world, and can be grown and stored in large quantities. This control over  the food supply made it possible for many people to be fed reliably from a small  patch of land: so cultivation of the fields led to settlement, the first cities, and  cultivation of the human mind. On the other hand, agriculture drastically reduced  the variety of plant foods in the human diet. Millennia later, industrialization  reduced it even further. Fruits and vegetables became accessory, even marginal  foods in the modern Western diet. Only recently have we begun to understand  how the human body still depends for its long-term health on a various diet rich in  fruits and vegetables, herbs and spices. Happily, modern technologies now give us
unprecedented access to the world’s cornucopia of edible plants. The time is ripe  to explore this fascinating — and still evolving — legacy of natural and human  inventiveness.  The Original Food  The idea that plants are our original and therefore only proper food has deep  cultural roots. In the Golden Age described by Greek and Roman mythology,  the earth gave of itself freely, without cultivation, and humans ate only nuts  and fruit. And in Genesis, Adam and Eve spend their brief innocence as  gardeners:  And the Lord God planted a garden eastward in Eden; and there he put the  man whom he had formed. And out of the ground made the Lord God to  grow every tree that is pleasant to the sight, and good for food…And the  Lord God took the man, and put him into the Garden of Eden to dress it and  to keep it.  The Bible doesn’t mention meat as food until after it records the first killing,  Cain’s murder of his brother Abel. Many individuals and groups from  Pythagoras to the present have chosen to eat only plant foods to avoid taking  the life of another creature capable of feeling pain. And most people  throughout history have had no choice, because meat is far more costly to  produce than grains and tubers.  This chapter is a general introduction to the foods that we obtain from plants.  Because there are so many of them, particular fruits and vegetables, herbs and  spices are described in subsequent chapters. Foods derived from seeds — grains,  legumes, nuts — have special properties, and are described separately in chapter  9.
Plants as Food  The Nature of Plants  Plants and animals are very different kinds of living things, and this is because they  have evolved different solutions to a single basic challenge: how to obtain the  energy and substance necessary to grow and reproduce. Plants essentially nourish  themselves. They build their tissues out of water, minerals, and air, and run them  on the energy in sunlight. Animals, on the other hand, can’t extract energy and  construct complex molecules from such primitive materials. They must obtain  them premade, and they do so by consuming other living things. Plants are  independent   autotrophs,   while animals are parasitic   heterotrophs.   (Parasitism may  not sound especially admirable, but without it there would be no need to eat and  so none of the pleasures of eating and cooking!)  There are various ways of being an autotroph. Some archaic bacteria, which are  microbes   consisting   of   a   single   cell,   manipulate   sulfur,   nitrogen,   and   iron  compounds to produce energy. The most important development for the future of  eating came more than 3 billion years ago with the evolution of a bacterium that  could tap the energy in sunlight and store it in carbohydrate molecules (molecules  built from carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen). Chlorophyll, the green pigment we see  in vegetation all around us, is a molecule that captures sunlight and initiates this  process of   photosynthesis,   which culminates in the creation of the simple sugar  glucose.  6CO 2   + 6H 2 O + light energy   C →   6 H 12 O 6   + 6O 2  carbon dioxide + water + light energy   glucose + oxygen →  The bacteria that managed to “invent” chlorophyll gave rise to algae and all green  land plants — and indirectly to land animals as well. Before photosynthesis, the  earth’s atmosphere contained little oxygen, and the sun’s killing ultraviolet rays  penetrated all the way to the ground and several feet into the oceans. Living  organisms could therefore survive only in deeper waters. When photosynthetic  bacteria and early algae burgeoned, they liberated vast quantities of oxygen (O 2 ),  which radiation in the upper atmosphere converted to ozone (O 3 ), which in turn  absorbed ultraviolet light and prevented much of it from reaching the earth’s
surface. Land life was now possible.  The challenging life of the plant. Plants are rooted to one spot in the earth, where they  absorb water and minerals from the soil, carbon dioxide and oxygen from the air, and  light energy from the sun, and transform these inorganic materials into plant tissues  — and into nourishment for insects and other animals. Plants defend themselves  against predators with a variety of chemical weapons, some of which also make them  flavorful, healthful, or both. In order to spread their offspring far and wide, some plants  surround their seeds with tasty and nourishing fruits that animals carry away and eat,  often spilling some seeds in the process.  So we owe our very existence as oxygen-breathing, land-dwelling animals to the  greenery we walk through and cultivate and consume every day of our lives.  Why Plants Aren’t Meaty   Land-dwelling plants that can nourish themselves still  need access to the soil for minerals and trapped water, to the atmosphere for  carbon dioxide and oxygen, and to the sun for energy. All of these sources are  pretty reliable, and plants have developed an economical structure that takes  advantage of this reliability. Roots penetrate the soil to reach stable supplies of  water and minerals; leaves maximize their surface area to capture sunlight and  exchange gases with the air; and stalks support leaves and connect them with  roots. Plants are essentially stationary chemical factories, made up of chambers for  carbohydrate synthesis and carbohydrate storage, and tubes to transfer chemicals  from one part of the factory to another, with structural reinforcement — also  mainly carbohydrates — to provide mechanical rigidity and strength. Parasitic  animals,   by contrast,   must find and feed on   other organisms, so they are  constructed mainly of muscle proteins that transform chemical energy into
physical motion (p. 121).  Why Plants Have Strong Flavors and Effects   Animals can also use their mobility  to avoid becoming another creature’s meal, by fleeing or fighting. But stationary  plants? They compensate for their immobility with a remarkable ability for  chemical synthesis. These master alchemists produce thousands of strong-tasting,  sometimes poisonous warning signals that discourage bacteria, fungi, insects, and  us from attacking them. A partial list of their chemical warfare agents would  include irritating compounds like mustard oil, hot-chilli capsaicin, and the tear-  inducing factor in onions; bitter and toxic alkaloids like caffeine in coffee and  solanine in potatoes; the cyanide compounds found in lima beans and many fruit  seeds;   and   substances   that   interfere   with   the   digestive   process,   including  astringent tannins and inhibitors of digestive enzymes.  If plants are so well endowed with their own natural pesticides, then why isn’t the  world littered with the corpses of their victims? Because animals have learned to  recognize and avoid potentially harmful plants with the help of their senses of  smell   and   taste,   which   can   detect   chemical   compounds   in   very   small  concentrations.   Animals   have   developed   appropriate   innate   responses   to  significant tastes — aversion to the bitterness typical of alkaloids and cyanide,  attraction to the sweetness of nutritionally important sugars. And some animals  have developed specific detoxifying enzymes that enable them to exploit an  otherwise toxic plant. The koala bear can eat eucalyptus leaves, and monarch  butterfly caterpillars milkweed. Humans invented their own ingenious detoxifying  methods, including plant selection and breeding and cooking. Cultivated varieties  of such vegetables as cabbage, lima beans, potatoes, and lettuce are less toxic than  their wild ancestors. And many toxins can be destroyed by heat or leached away in  boiling water.  A fascinating wrinkle in this story is that humans actually prize and seek out certain  plant toxins! We’ve managed to learn which irritating warning signals are relatively  harmless, and have come to enjoy sensations whose actual purpose is to repel us.  Hence our seemingly perverse love of mustard and pepper and onions. This is the  essential appeal of herbs and spices, as we’ll see in chapter 8.  Why   Ripe   Fruits   Are   Especially   Delicious   The   higher   plants   and   animals  reproduce by fusing genetic material from male and female sex organs, usually  from different individuals. Animals have the advantage of being mobile: male and
female can sense each other’s presence and move toward each other. Plants can’t  move, and instead have to depend on mobile go-betweens. The male pollen of  most land plants is carried to the female ovule by the wind or by animals. To  encourage animals to help out, advanced plants evolved the flower, an organ  whose shape, color, and scent are designed to attract a particular assistant, usually  an insect. As it flies around and collects nutritious nectar or pollen for food, the  insect spreads the pollen from one plant to another.  Once male and female cells have come together and developed into offspring,  they must be given a good start. The animal mother can search out a promising  location and deposit her young there. But plants need help. If the seeds simply  dropped from the plant to the ground, they would have to compete with each  other and with their overshadowing parent for sunlight and soil minerals. So  successful plant families have developed mechanisms for dispersing their seeds far  and wide. These mechanisms include seed containers that pop open and propel  their contents in all directions, seed appendages that catch the wind or the fur of a  passing animal — and structures that hitch a ride   inside   passersby. Fruits are plant  organs that actually invite animals to eat them, so that the animals will carry their  seeds away, and often pass them through their digestive system and deposit them  in a nourishing pile of manure. (The seeds escape destruction in various ways,  among them by being large and armored, or tiny and easily spilled, or poisonous.)  So, unlike the rest of the plant, fruit is   meant   to be eaten. This is why its taste, odor,  and texture are so appealing to our animal senses. But the invitation to eat must be  delayed until the seeds are mature and viable. This is the purpose of the changes in  color, texture, and flavor that we call ripening. Leaves, roots, stalks can be eaten at  any time, generally the earlier the tenderer. But we must wait for fruit to signal that  it is ready to be eaten. The details of ripening are described in chapter 7 (p. 350).  Our   Evolutionary   Partners   Like   us,   most   of   our   food   plants   are   relative  newcomers to the earth. Life arose about 4 billion years ago, but flowering plants  have been around for only about 200 million years, and dominant for the last 50  million. An even more recent development is the “herbaceous” habit of life. Most  food plants are not long-lived trees, but relatively small, delicate plants that  produce their seeds and die in one growing season. This herbaceous habit gives  plants greater flexibility in adapting to changing conditions, and it has worked to  our advantage as well. It allows us to grow crops to maturity in a few months,  change plantings from year to year, rapidly breed new varieties, and eat plant parts
that would be inedible were they toughened to endure for years. Herbaceous  plants became widespread only in the last few million years, just as the human  species was emerging. They made possible our rapid cultural development, and  we   in   turn   have   used   selection   and   breeding   to   direct   their   biological  development. We and our food plants have been partners in each other’s  evolution.  Definitions  We group the foods we obtain from plants into several loose categories.  Fruit and Vegetable   Apart from such plant seeds as wheat and rice, which are  described in chapter 9, the most prominent plant foods in our diet are fruits and  vegetables.   Vegetable   took on its current sense just a few centuries ago, and  essentially means a plant material that is neither fruit nor seed. So what is a fruit?  The word has both a technical and a common meaning. Beginning in the 17th  century, botanists defined it as the organ that develops from the flower’s ovary  and surrounds the plant’s seeds. But in common usage, seed-surrounding green  beans, eggplants, cucumbers, and corn kernels are called vegetables, not fruits.  Even the United States Supreme Court has preferred the cook’s definition over the  botanist’s. In the 1890s, a New York food importer claimed duty-free status for a  shipment of tomatoes, arguing that tomatoes were fruits, and so under the  regulations of the time, not subject to import fees. The customs agent ruled that  tomatoes were vegetables and imposed a duty. A majority of the Supreme Court  decided that tomatoes were “usually served at a dinner in, with, or after the soup,  fish, or meat, which constitute the principal part of the repast, and not, like fruits,  generally as dessert.” Ergo tomatoes were vegetables, and the importer had to pay.  The Key Distinction: Flavor   Why do we customarily prepare vegetables as side  dishes to the main course, and make fruits the centerpiece of the meal’s climax?  Culinary fruits are distinguished from vegetables by one important characteristic:  they’re among the few things we eat that we’re meant to eat. Many plants have  engineered their fruits to appeal to the animal senses, so that animals will eat them  and disperse the seeds within. These fruits are the natural world’s soft drinks and  candies, flashily packaged in bright colors, and test-marketed through millions of  years of natural selection. They tend to have a high sugar content, to satisfy the  innate liking for sweetness shared by all animals. They have a pronounced and
complex aroma, which may involve several hundred different chemicals, far more  than any other natural ingredient. And they soften themselves to an appealingly  tender, moist consistency. By contrast, the plant foods that we treat as vegetables  remain firm, have either a very mild flavor — green beans and potatoes — or else  an excessively strong one — onions and cabbage — and therefore require the  craft of the cook to make them palatable.  The very words   fruit   and   vegetable   reflect these differences.   Vegetable   comes from  the Latin verb   vegere,   meaning to invigorate or enliven.   Fruit,   on the other hand,  comes from Latin   fructus,   whose cluster of related meanings includes gratification,  pleasure, satisfaction, enjoyment. It’s the nature of fruit to taste good, to appeal to  our basic biological interests, while vegetables stimulate us to find and create  more subtle and diverse pleasures than fruits have to offer.  Herb and Spice   The terms   herb   and   spice   are more straightforward. Both are  categories of plant materials used primarily as flavorings, and in relatively small  amounts. Herbs come from green parts of plants, usually leaves — parsley, thyme,  basil — while spices are generally seeds, bark, underground stems — black  pepper, cinnamon, ginger — and other robust materials that were well suited to  international trade in early times. The word   spice   came from the medieval Latin  species,   which meant “kind of merchandise.”  Despite the fact that we consider them vegetables, capsicum “peppers,” pea pods,  cucumbers, and even corn kernels are actually fruits: plant parts that originate in the  flower’s ovary and surround one or more seeds.
Vegetables, Fruits, and Spices Used in the West  Vegetables   Fruits   Herbs and Spices  Mediterranean Area Natives, Used   BCE  Mushroom   Beet  Radish   Turnip  Carrot   Parsnip  Asparagus   Leek  Onion   Cabbage  Lettuce   Artichoke  Cucumber   Broad bean  Pea   Olive  Apple  Pear  Cherry  Grape  Fig  Date  Strawberry  Basil   Marjoram  Fennel   Mint  Rosemary   Sage  Savory   Thyme  Anise   Caraway  Coriander   Cumin  Dill   Parsley  Oregano   Bay  Caper   Fenugreek  Garlic   Mustard  Poppy   Sesame  Saffron  Later Additions  Spinach  Celery  Rhubarb  Cauliflower  Broccoli  Brussels sprouts  Asian Natives, Brought to the West   BCE  Citron  Apricot  Peach  Cardamom  Ginger  Cinnamon  Turmeric  Black pepper
Imported Later  Yam  Water  Bamboo  Eggplant  Lemon  Lime  Orange  Melon  Tarragon  Mace  Clove  Nutmeg  New World Natives, Imported 15th–16th Centuries  Potato  Sweet potato  Pumpkin  Squashes  Tomato  Kidney bean  Lima bean  Capsicum pepper  Avocado  Pineapple   Allspice  Chillis  Vanilla  Plant Foods Through History  How long has the Western world been eating the plant foods we eat today, and in  the way that we eat them? Only a very few common vegetables have   not   been  eaten since before recorded history (the relative newcomers include broccoli,  cauliflower, brussels sprouts, celery). But it was only with the age of exploration in  the 16th century that the variety of foods we now know became available to any  single culture. In the Western world, fruit has been eaten as dessert at least since  the Greeks; recognizable salads go back to the Middle Ages, and boiled vegetables  in delicate sauces to 17th-century France.  Prehistory and Early Civilizations   Many plants came under human cultivation by  the unsophisticated but slowly effective means of gathering useful plants and  leaving a few seeds in fertile refuse heaps. Judging from archaeological evidence,  early Europeans seem to have relied on wheat, fava beans, peas, turnips, onions,  radishes, and cabbage. In Central America, corn, beans, hard squashes, tomatoes,
and avocados were staples around 3500   BCE , while Peruvian settlements relied  heavily on the potato. Northern Asia started with millets, cabbage relatives,  soybeans, and tree fruits in the apple and peach families; southern Asia had rice,  bananas, coconuts, yams, cabbage relatives, and citrus fruits. Indigenous African  crops included related but distinct millets, sorghum, rice, and bananas, as well as  yams and cowpeas. Mustard seed flavored foods in Europe and in Asia, where  ginger may also have been used. Chilli “pepper” was probably the chief spice in the  Americas.  By the time of the earliest civilizations in Sumer and Egypt about 5,000 years ago,  most of the plants native to that area and eaten today were already in use (see box,  p. 250). Trade between the Middle East and Asia is also ancient. Egyptian records of  around 1200   BCE   document huge offerings of cinnamon, a product of Sri Lanka.  Greece, Rome, and the Middle Ages   With the Greeks and Romans we begin to  see the outlines of modern Western cuisine. The Greeks were fond of lettuce, and  habitually ate fruit at the end of meals. Pepper from the Far East was in use around  500   BCE   and quickly became the most popular spice of the ancient world. In Rome,  lettuce was served at both the beginning and end of meals, and fruit as dessert.  Thanks to the art of grafting growing shoots from desirable trees onto other trees,  there were about 25 named apple varieties and 35 pears. Fruits were preserved  whole by immersing them, stems and all, in honey, and the gastronome Apicius  Plant Ingredients in Rome and Medieval Europe  A Roman Sauce for Shellfish  Cumin Sauce, for Shellfish:   Pepper, lovage, parsley, mint, aromatic leaf [e.g.,  bay], malabathrum [a Middle Eastern leaf], plenty of cumin, honey, vinegar,  liquamen [a fermented fish paste similar to our anchovy paste].  — from Apicius, first few centuries   CE  Medieval Sauces, French (Taillevent, ca. 1375)  and English   (The Forme of Cury   , ca. 1390)  Sauce Cameline, for Meats:  France: Ginger, mace, cinnamon, cloves, grain of paradise, pepper, vinegar,  bread [to thicken].
England: Ginger, cloves, cinnamon, currants, nuts, vinegar, bread crusts.  Verde Sauce:  France: Parsley, ginger, vinegar, bread.  England: Parsley, ginger, vinegar, bread, mint, garlic, thyme, sage, cinnamon,  pepper, saffron, salt, wine.  Salad and a Vegetable Compote   (The Forme of Cury   , ca. 1390)  Salat:   Take parsley, sage, garlic, scallions, onions, leeks, borage, mints, young  leeks, fennel, cress, new rosemary, purslane; wash them clean; pick them and  pluck them small with your hands, and mix them well with raw oil. Lay on  vinegar and salt, and serve it forth.  Compost:   Take root of parsley and parsnip, scrape them and wash them clean.  Take turnips and cabbages pared and cut. Take an earthen pan with clean  water, and set it on the fire. Cast all these things in. When they are boiled, add  pears and parboil them well. Take these things out and let them cool on a fair  cloth. Put in a vessel and add salt when it is cold. Take vinegar and powder  and saffron and add. And let all these things lie there all night or day. Take  Greek wine and honey clarified together, Lombardy mustard, and raisins,  whole currants, and grind sweet powder and whole anise, and fennel seed.  Take all these things and cast them together in a pot of earth, and take some  when you wish, and serve it forth.  gave a recipe for pickled peaches. From the Roman recipes that survive, it would  seem that few foods were served without the application of several strong flavors.  When the Romans conquered Europe they brought along tree fruits, the vine, and  cultivated cabbage, as well as their heavy spice habit. Sauce recipes from the 14th  century resemble those of Apicius, and the English lettuce-free salad would also  have been quite pungent (see box, p. 251). Medieval recipe collections include  relatively few vegetable dishes.  New World, New Foods   Plants — and especially the spice plants — helped shape  world history in the last five centuries. The ancient European hunger for Asian  spices was an important driving force in the development of Italy, Portugal, Spain,  Holland, and England into major sea powers during the Renaissance. Columbus,  Vasco da Gama, John Cabot, and Magellan were looking for a new route to the
Indies in order to break the monopoly of Venice and southern Arabia on the  ancient trade in cinnamon, cloves, nutmeg, and black pepper. They failed in that  quest, but succeeded in opening the “West Indies” to European exploitation. The  New World was initially disappointing in its yield of sought-for spices. But vanilla  and chillis quickly became popular; and its wealth of new vegetables was largely  adaptable to Europe’s climate: so the common bean, corn, squashes, tomatoes,  potatoes, and sweet chillis eventually became staple ingredients in the new  cuisines of the Old World.  The 17th and 18th centuries were a time of assimilating the new foods and  advancing the art of cooking them. Cultivation and breeding received new  attention; Louis XIV’s orchards and plantings at Versailles were legendary. And  cooks took a greater interest in vegetables, and handled them with greater  refinement, in part to make the meatless diet of Lent and other Catholic fasts more  interesting. France’s first great culinary writer, Pierre François de La Varenne, chef to  Henri IV, included meatless recipes for peas, turnips, lettuce, spinach, cucumbers,  cabbage (five ways), chicory, celery, carrots, cardoons, and beets, as well as  ordinary dishes of artichokes, asparagus, mushrooms, and cauliflower. And the  recipes leave a major role for the vegetables’ own flavors. Similarly, the Englishman  John Evelyn wrote a book-length disquisition on salads, once again firmly based  on the lettuces, and emphasized the importance of balance.  Refinements of 17th-Century Vegetable Cooking  Choose the largest asparagus, scrape them at the bottom, and wash.  Cook them in some water, salt them well, and do not let them  overcook. When done, let them drain, and make a sauce with some  good fresh butter, a little vinegar, salt, and nutmeg, and an egg yolk to  bind the sauce; take care that it doesn’t curdle. Serve the asparagus  well garnished with whatever you like.  — La Varenne,   Le Cuisinier françois,   1655  …by reason of its soporifous quality, lettuce ever was, and still  continues the principal foundation of the universal tribe of Sallets,  which is to cool and refresh, besides its other properties [which
included beneficial influences on “morals, temperance, and chastity”].  We have said how necessary it is that in the composure of a sallet, every  plant should come in to bear its part, without being overpower’d by  some herb of a stronger taste, so as to endanger the native sapor and  virtue of the rest; but fall into their places, like the notes in music, in  which there should be nothing harsh or grating: And though admitting  some discords (to distinguish and illustrate the rest) striking in all the  more sprightly, and sometimes gentler notes, reconcile all dissonancies,  and melt them into an agreeable composition.  — John Evelyn,   Acetaria: A Discourse of Sallets , 1699  With the 19th century, English vegetable cooking became ever simpler until it  almost always meant boiled and buttered, a quick and simple method for homes  and restaurants alike, while in France the elaborate professional style reached its  apogee. The influential chef Antonin Carême declared in his   Art of French Cooking  in the 19th Century   (1835) that “it is in the confection of the Lenten cuisine that the  chef’s science must shine with new luster.” Carême’s enlarged repertoire included  broccoli, truffles, eggplant, sweet potatoes, and potatoes, these last fixed   à  l’anglaise, dites, Mache-Potetesse   (“in the English style, that is, mashed”). Of course,  such luster tends to undermine the whole point of Lent. In his   366 Menus   (1872),  Baron Brisse asked: “Are the meatless meals of our Lenten enthusiasts really meals  of abstinence?”  The   Influence   of   Modern   Technology   The   age   of   exploration   and   the  advancement of fine cooking brought a new prominence to fruits and vegetables  in Europe. Then the social and technical innovations of the industrial age conspired  to make them both less available and less desirable. Beginning early in the 19th  century, as industrialization drew people from the agricultural countryside to the  cities, fruits and vegetables became progressively rarer in the diets of Europe and  North   America.   Urban   supplies   did   improve   with   the   development   of   rail  transportation in the 1820s, then canning at mid-century, and refrigeration a few  decades later. Around the turn of the 20th century, vitamins and their nutritional  significance were discovered, and fruits and vegetables were soon officially  canonized as one of the four food groups that should be eaten at every meal. Still,
the consumption of fresh produce continued to decline through much of the 20th  century, at least in part because its quality and variety were also declining. In the  modern   system   of   food   production,   with   crops   being   handled   in   massive  quantities   and   shipped   thousands   of   miles,   the   most   important   crop  characteristics became productivity, uniformity, and durability. Rather than being  bred for flavor and harvested at flavor’s peak, fruits and vegetables were bred to  withstand the rigors of mechanical harvesting, transport, and storage, and were  harvested while still hard, often weeks or months before they would be sold and  eaten. A few mediocre varieties came to dominate the market, while thousands of  others, the legacy of centuries of breeding, disappeared or survived only in  backyard gardens.  At the end of the 20th century, several developments in the industrialized world  brought renewed attention to plant foods, to their diversity and quality. One was a  new appreciation of their importance for human health, thanks to the discovery of  trace “phytochemicals” that appear to help fight cancer and heart disease (p. 255).  Another was the growing interest in exotic and unfamiliar cuisines and ingredients,  and their increasing availability in ethnic markets. Yet another, at the opposite  extreme, was the rediscovery of the traditional system of food production and its  pleasures: eating locally grown foods, often forgotten “heirloom” or other unusual  varieties, that were harvested a matter of hours beforehand, then sold at farmers’  markets by the people who grew them. Allied to this trend was the growing  interest in “organic” foods, produced without relying on the modern array of  chemicals for controlling pests and disease. Organic practices mean different  things to different people, and don’t guarantee either safer or more nutritious  foods — agriculture is more complicated than that. But they represent an essential,  prominent alternative to industrial farming, one that encourages attention to the  quality of agricultural produce and the sustainability of agricultural practices.  These are good times for curious and adventurous eaters. There are many  forgotten varieties of familiar fruits and vegetables to revive, and many new foods  to taste. It’s estimated that there are 300,000 edible plant species on earth, and  perhaps 2,000 that are cultivated to some extent. We have plenty of exploring to  do!
Genetic Engineering and Food  The most far-reaching development in 20th-century agriculture was the  introduction in the 1980s of genetic engineering, the technology that makes  it possible to alter our food plants and animals by surgically precise  manipulation of the DNA that makes up their genes. This manipulation  bypasses the natural barriers between species, so theoretically a gene from  any living thing, plant or animal or microbe, can be introduced into any other.  Genetic engineering is still in its infancy, and to date has had a limited impact  on the foods we eat. In the United States, an estimated 75% of all processed  foods now contain genetically modified ingredients. But this remarkable  figure is due to just three agricultural commodities — soybean, canola, and  corn — all of them modified for improved resistance to insect pests or  herbicides. As I write in 2004, the only other significant engineered U.S. crop is  Hawaiian papaya, which is now resistant to a formerly devastating virus  disease. A few other foods are processed with enzymes made in engineered  microbes — for example, much cheese is coagulated with rennet made by  microbes into which the cattle gene for the enzyme has been inserted. But in  general, our raw ingredients remain relatively untouched by genetic  engineering.  This will certainly change in coming years, and not just in the West: China also  has a very active program in agricultural biotechnology. Genetic engineering  is the modern fruit of agriculture itself, an outgrowth of the ancient human  realization that living things can be shaped to human desires. That shaping  began when the first farmers selectively cultivated plants and animals that  grew larger or tasted better or looked more interesting. In its own way, this  simple process of observation and selection became a powerful biological  technology. It gradually revealed the hidden potential for diversity within  individual species, and made that potential real in the form of hundreds of  distinct varieties of wheat and cattle, citrus fruits and chillis, many of which  had never before existed in nature. Today, genetic engineers are exploring the  hidden potential for improving a given food plant or animal not just within  that species, but among all species, in the entire living world’s cornucopia of  DNA and its possible modifications.
Genetic engineering holds the promise of bringing great improvements to  the production and quality of our foods. However, like any powerful new  technology, it also has the potential to cause unintended and far-reaching  consequences. And as the instrument of industrial agriculture, it’s likely to  contribute to the ongoing erosion of traditional, decentralized, small-scale  food production and its ancient heritage of biological and cultural diversity.  It’s important that these environmental, social, and economic issues be  considered by all concerned — by the biotechnology and agriculture  industries, the governments that regulate them, the farmers who plant and  raise their products, the cooks and manufacturers who turn the products into  something edible, and the consumers who support the whole system by  buying and eating food — so that in the long run this new agricultural  revolution will benefit the common good as much as possible.  Plant Foods and Health  Plant foods can provide us all the nourishment we need in order to live and thrive.  Our primate ancestors started out eating little else, and many cultures still do. But  meat and other animal foods became important to our species at its birth, when  their concentrated energy and protein probably helped accelerate our evolution  (p. 119). Meat continued to have a deep biological appeal for us, and in societies  that could afford to feed livestock on staple grains and roots, it became the most  prized of foods. In the industrialized world, meat’s prestige and availability pushed  grains, vegetables, and fruits to the side of the plate and the end of the meal. And  for   decades,   nutritional   science   affirmed   their   accessory   status.   Fruits   and  vegetables in particular were considered to be the source of a few nutrients that  we need only in small amounts, and of mechanically useful roughage. In recent  years, though, we’ve begun to realize just how many valuable substances plant  foods have always held for us. And we’re still learning.  Essential Nutrients in Fruits and Vegetables: Vitamins  Most fruits and vegetables contribute only modestly to our intake of proteins and
calories, but they’re our major source for several vitamins. They provide nearly all  of our vitamin C, much of our folic acid, and half of our vitamin A. Each of these  plays a number of roles in the metabolism of our cells. For example, vitamin C  refreshes the chemical state of metal components in many enzymes, and helps  with the synthesis of connective-tissue collagen. Vitamin A, which our bodies make  from a precursor molecule in plants called beta-carotene (p. 267), helps regulate  the growth of several different kinds of cells, and helps our eyes detect light. Folic  acid, named from the Latin word for “leaf,” converts a by-product of our cells’  metabolism,   homocysteine,   into   the   amino   acid   methionine.   This   prevents  homocysteine levels from rising, causing damage to blood vessels, and possibly  contributing to heart disease and stroke.  Vitamins A, C, and E are also antioxidants (see below).  Phytochemicals  The first edition of this book reflected the prevailing nutritional wisdom circa 1980:  we should eat enough fruits and vegetables to avoid vitamin and mineral  deficiencies, and to keep our digestive system moving. Period.  What a difference 20 years makes!  Nutritional science has undergone a profound revolution in that time. For most of  the 20th century it aimed to define an   adequate   diet. It determined our body’s  minimal requirements for chemical building blocks (protein, minerals, fatty acids),  for essential cogs in its machinery (vitamins), and for the energy it needs to run  and maintain itself from day to day. Toward the end of the century, it became clear  from laboratory studies and comparisons of health statistics in different countries  that the major diseases of the adequately nourished developed world — cancer  and heart disease — are influenced by what we eat. Nutritional science then  began to focus on defining the elements of an   optimal   diet. So we discovered that  minor, nonessential food components can have a cumulative effect on our long-  term health. And plants, the planet’s biochemical virtuosos, turn out to be teeming  with trace   phytochemicals   — from the Greek   phyton,   meaning “leaf” — that  modulate our metabolism.  Antioxidants  Oxidative Damage: The Price of Living   One major theme in modern nutrition is
the body’s need to cope with the chemical wear and tear of life itself. Breathing is  essential to human life because our cells use oxygen to react with sugars and fats  and generate the chemical energy that keeps the cellular machinery functioning.  Unfortunately, it turns out that energy generation and other essential processes  involving   oxygen   generate   chemical   by-products   called “free   radicals,” very  unstable chemicals that react with and damage our own complex and delicate  chemical machinery. This damage is called   oxidative   because it usually originates in  reactions involving oxygen. It can affect different parts of the cell, and different  organs in the body. For example, oxidative damage to a cell’s DNA can cause that  cell to multiply uncontrollably and grow into a tumor. Oxidative damage to the  cholesterol-carrying particles in our blood can irritate the lining of our arteries, and  initiate damage that leads to a heart attack or stroke. The high-energy ultraviolet  rays in sunlight create free radicals in the eye that damage proteins in the lens and  retina, and cause cataracts, macular degeneration, and blindness.  Our   bodies   stave   off   such   drastic   consequences   by   means   of   antioxidant  molecules, which react harmlessly with free radicals before they have a chance to  do any damage to the cells’ chemical machinery. We need a continuous and  abundant supply of antioxidants to maintain our good health. The body does  make a few important antioxidant molecules of its own, including some powerful  enzymes. But the more help it gets, the better it’s able to defend itself from the  constant onslaught of free radicals. And plants turn out to be a goldmine of  antioxidants.  Antioxidants in Plants   Nowhere in living things is oxidative stress greater than in  the photosynthesizing leaf of a green plant, which harvests energetic particles of  sunlight, and uses them to split water molecules apart into hydrogen and oxygen  atoms in order to make sugars. Leaves and other exposed plant parts are  accordingly chock-full of antioxidant molecules that keep these high-energy  reactions   from   damaging   essential   DNA   and   proteins.   Among   these   plant  antioxidants are the carotenoid pigments, including orange beta-carotene, yellow  lutein and zeaxanthin, and the red lycopene that colors tomato fruits. Green  chlorophyll itself is an antioxidant, as are vitamins C and E. Then there are  thousands of different “phenolic” compounds built from rings of 6 carbon atoms,  which play several roles in plant life, from pigmentation to antimicrobial duty to  attracting and repelling animals. All fruits, vegetables, and grains probably contain  at least a few kinds of phenolic compounds; and the more pigmented and
astringent they are, the more they’re likely to be rich in phenolic antioxidants.  Each plant part, each fruit and vegetable, has its own characteristic cluster of  antioxidants. And each kind of antioxidant generally protects against a certain kind  of molecular damage, or helps regenerate certain other protective molecules. No  single   molecule   can   protect   against   all   kinds   of   damage.   Unusually   high  concentrations of single types can actually tip the balance the wrong way and  cause   damage. So the best way to reap the full benefits of the antioxidant powers  of plants is not to take manufactured supplements of a few prominent chemicals:  it is to eat lots of different vegetables and fruits.  Other Beneficial Phytochemicals   Antioxidants may be the most important group  of ingredients for maintaining long-term health, but they’re not the only one. Trace  chemicals in plants, including herbs and spices, are turning out to have helpful  effects on many other processes that affect the balance between health and  disease. For example, some act like aspirin (originally found in plants) to prevent  the body from overreacting to minor damage with an inflammation that can lead  to heart disease or cancer; some prevent the body from turning mildly toxic  chemicals into more powerful toxins that damage DNA and cause cancer; some  inhibit the growth of cells that are already cancerous. Others slow the loss of  calcium from our bones, encourage the growth of beneficial bacteria in our  system, and discourage the growth of disease bacteria.  The box on p. 256 lists some of these effects, and the chemicals and plants that  cause them. Our knowledge of this aspect of nutrition is still in its infancy, but we  know enough right now for at least one conclusion to be evident: no single fruit or  vegetable offers the many kinds of protections that a varied diet can provide.  So today’s provisional nutritional wisdom goes like this: fruits and vegetables,  herbs and spices supply us with many different beneficial substances. Within an  otherwise adequate diet, we should eat as much of them as we can, and as great a  variety as we can.  Estimating Healthfulness by Eye   There’s a useful guideline for estimating the  relative healthfulness of vegetables and fruits: the deeper its color, the more  healthful the food is likely to be. The more light a leaf gets, the more pigments and  antioxidants it needs to handle the energy input, and so the darker the coloration  of the leaf. For example, the light-colored inner leaves of lettuce and cabbage  varieties that form tight heads contain a fraction of the carotene found in the
darker outer leaves and in the leaves of more open varieties. Similarly, the dark  leaves of open romaine lettuce contain nearly 10 times the eye-protecting lutein  and zeaxanthin of the pale, tight heads of iceberg lettuce. Other deeply colored  fruits and vegetables also contain more beneficial carotenoids and phenolic  compounds than their pale counterparts. Their skins are especially rich sources.  Among   the   fruits   highest   in   antioxidant   content   are   cherries,   red   grapes,  blueberries, and strawberries; among vegetables, garlic, red and yellow onions,  asparagus, green beans, and beets.  Some Beneficial Effects of Chemical s   in Fruits and Vegetables,  Herbs and Spices  This is a very broad survey of a rich and complex subject. It’s meant to give a  general idea of how a variety of plant chemicals can affect various aspects of  our health by a variety of means. Certain phenolic compounds, for example,  appear capable of helping us fight cancer by preventing oxidative damage to  DNA in healthy cells, by preventing the body from forming its own DNA-  damaging chemicals, and by inhibiting the growth of already cancerous cells.  Prevent oxidative damage to important molecules in body: antioxidants  Eye:   slow cataracts and macular degeneration  Kale, many dark green vegetables (carotenoids: lutein)  Citrus fruits, corn (carotenoids: zeaxanthin)  Blood lipids:   slow development of heart disease  Grapes, other berries (phenolics: anthocyanidins)  Tea (phenolics)  General:   reduce DNA damage, development of cancer  Tomatoes (carotenoids: lycopene)  Carrots, other orange and green vegetables (carotenoids)  Tea (phenolics)
Green vegetables (chlorophyll)  Broccoli, daikon, cabbage family (glucosinolates, thiocyanates)  Moderate the body’s inflammatory response  General:   slow development of heart disease, cancer  Raisins, dates, chillis, tomatoes (salicylates)  Reduce the body’s own production of DNA-damaging chemicals  Many fruits, vegetables (phenolics: flavonoids)  Broccoli, daikon, cabbage family (glucosinolates, thiocyanates)  Citrus fruits (terpenes)  Inhibit the growth of cancer cells and tumors  Many fruits, vegetables (phenolics: flavonoids)  Soybeans (phenolics: isoflavones)  Grapes, berries (phenolics: ellagic acid)  Rye, flaxseed (phenolics: lignans)  Citrus fruits (terpenes)  Mushrooms (carbohydrates)  Slow the body’s removal of calcium from bones  Onions, parsley (responsible agents not yet identified)  Encourage the growth of beneficial bacteria in the intestine  Onion family, sunchokes (inulin)  Prevent the adhesion of infectious bacteria to walls of urinary tract  Cranberries, grapes (phenolics: proanthocyanidins)  Fiber  Fiber is defined as the material in our plant foods that our digestive enzymes can’t  break down into absorbable nutrients. These substances therefore aren’t absorbed
in the small intestine, and pass intact into the large intestine, where some are  broken down by intestinal bacteria, and the rest are excreted. The four main  components of fiber come from plant cell walls (p. 265). Cellulose and lignin form  solid fibers that don’t dissolve in our watery digestive fluids, while pectins and  hemicelluloses do dissolve into their individual molecules. Minor components of  fiber include uncooked starch and various gums, mucilages, and other unusual  carbohydrates (e.g., mushroom chitin, seaweed agar and carrageenan, inulin in  onions, artichokes, and sunchokes). Particular foods offer particular kinds of fiber.  Wheat bran — the dry outer coat of the grain — is a rich source of insoluble  cellulose, while oat bran is a rich source of soluble glucan (a carbohydrate), and  juicy ripe fruits are a relatively dilute source of soluble pectins.  The different fiber components contribute to health in different ways. Insoluble  cellulose and lignin mainly provide bulk to the intestinal contents, and thus  increase the rate and ease with which they pass through the large intestine. It’s  thought that rapid excretion may help minimize our exposure to DNA-damaging  chemicals and other toxins in our foods, and the fiber materials may bind some of  these toxins and prevent them from being absorbed by our cells. Soluble fiber  components make the intestinal contents thicker, so that there is slower mixing  and movement of both nutrients and toxins. They, too, probably bind certain  chemicals and prevent their absorption. Soluble fiber has been shown to lower  blood cholesterol and slow the rise of blood sugar after a meal. Inulin in particular  encourages   the growth   of beneficial   intestinal   bacteria,   while reducing the  numbers of potential troublemakers. The details are complex, but overall it appears  that soluble fiber helps protect against heart disease and diabetes.  In sum, the indigestible portion of fruits and vegetables does us good. It’s a  mistake to think that a juiced orange or carrot is as valuable as the whole fruit or  vegetable.  Toxins in Some Fruits and Vegetables  Many plants, perhaps all plants, contain chemicals meant to discourage animals  from eating them. The fruits and vegetables that we eat are no exception. While  domestication and breeding have reduced their toxin contents to the point that  they’re not generally hazardous, unusual preparations or serving sizes can cause  problems. The following plant toxins are worth being aware of.
Alkaloids   Alkaloids are bitter-tasting toxins that appeared in plants about the time  that mammals evolved, and seem especially effective at deterring our branch of  the animal family by both taste and aftereffects. Almost all known alkaloids are  poisonous at high doses, and most alter animal metabolism at lower doses: hence  the attractions of caffeine and nicotine. Among familiar foods, only the potato  accumulates   potentially   troublesome   alkaloid   levels,   which   make   greened  potatoes and potato sprouts bitter and toxic (p. 302).  Cyanogens   Cyanogens are molecules that warn and poison animals with bitter  hydrogen cyanide, a deadly poison of the enzymes that animals use to generate  energy. When the plant’s tissue is damaged by chewing, the cyanogens are mixed  with the plant enzyme that breaks them apart and releases hydrogen cyanide  (HCN). Cyanogen-rich foods, including manioc, bamboo shoots, and tropical  varieties of lima beans, are made safe for consumption by open boiling, leaching in  water, and fermentation. The seeds of citrus, stone, and pome fruits generate  cyanide, and stone-fruit seeds are prized because their cyanogens also produce  benzaldehyde, the characteristic odor of almond extract (p. 506).  Hydrazines   Hydrazines are nitrogen-containing substances that are found in  relatively large amounts (500 parts per million) in the common white mushroom  and   other   mushroom   varieties,   and   that   persist   after   cooking.   Mushroom  hydrazines cause liver damage and cancer when fed to laboratory mice, but have  no effect in rats. It’s not yet clear whether they pose a significant hazard to  humans. Until we know, it’s best to eat mushrooms in moderation.  Protease Inhibitors and Lectins   These are proteins that interfere with digestion:  inhibitors block the action of protein-digesting enzymes, and lectins bind to  intestinal cells and prevent them from absorbing nutrients. Lectins can also enter  the blood-stream and bind red blood cells to each other. They’re found mainly in  soy, kidney, and lima beans. Both inhibitors and lectins are inactivated by  prolonged   boiling.   But   they   can   survive   in   beans   that   are   eaten   raw   or  undercooked, and cause symptoms similar to food poisoning.  Flavor Chemicals   Flavor chemicals are generally consumed in only tiny amounts,  but a few may cause problems when overindulged in. Safrole, the main aromatic in  oil of sassafras and therefore of traditional root beer, causes DNA damage and was  banned as an additive in 1960 (root beer is now made with safe sarsaparilla or  artificial flavorings). Myristicin, the major flavor contributor in nutmeg, seems
largely responsible for intoxication and hallucinations that result from ingesting  large amounts. Glycyrrhizin, an intensely sweet-tasting substance in true licorice  root, induces high blood pressure. Coumarin, which gives sweet clover its sweet  aroma and is also found in lavender and vanilla-like tonka beans ( Dipteryx odorata ),  interferes with blood clotting.  Toxic Amino Acids   Toxic amino acids are unusual versions of the building blocks  for   our   proteins   that   interfere   with   proper   protein   functioning.   Canavanine  interferes   with   several   cell   functions   and   has   been   associated   with   the  development of lupus; it’s found in large quantities in alfalfa sprouts and the jack  bean. Vicine and convicine in the fava bean cause a blood-cell-destroying anemia,  favism, in susceptible people (p. 490).  Oxalates   Oxalates are various salts of oxalic acid, a waste product of plant  metabolism found in a number of foods, notably spinach, chard, beets, amaranth,  and rhubarb. The sodium and potassium salts are soluble, while the calcium salts  are insoluble and form crystals that irritate the mouth and digestive system.  Soluble oxalates can combine with calcium in the human kidney to form painful  kidney stones. In very large doses — a few grams — oxalic acid is corrosive and  can be fatal.  Bracken-Fern Toxins   Bracken-fern toxins cause several blood disorders and cancer  in animals that graze on this common fern ( Pteridium ), which is sometimes  collected in the young “fiddlehead” stage for human consumption. Ostrich ferns,  Matteuccia   species, are thought to be a safer source of fiddleheads, but there’s little  solid information about the safety of eating ferns. It’s prudent to eat fiddleheads in  moderation, and to avoid bracken ferns by checking labels and asking produce  sellers.  Psoralens   Psoralens are chemicals that damage DNA and cause blistering skin  inflammations. They’re found occasionally in badly handled celery and celery root,  parsley, and parsnips, when these vegetables have been stressed by near-freezing  temperatures, intense light, or infection by mold. Psoralens are absorbed through  the skin during handling, or by being ingested with the vegetable, either raw or  cooked. They lie dormant in skin cells until they’re struck by ultraviolet rays in  sunlight, which causes them to bind to and damage DNA and important cell  proteins. The psoralen-generating vegetables should be bought as fresh as  possible and used quickly.
In addition to their own chemical defenses, fruits and vegetables can carry other  toxins that come from contaminating molds (patulin in apple juice, from a  Penicillium   mold growing on damaged fruit), agricultural chemicals (pesticides,  herbicides, fungicides), and soil and air pollutants (dioxins, polycyclic aromatic  hydrocarbons). In general, it’s thought that the usual levels of these contaminants  do not constitute an immediate health hazard. On the other hand, they are toxins,  and therefore undesirable additions to our diet. We can reduce our intake of them  by washing produce, by peeling off surface layers, and by buying certified organic  produce, which is grown in relatively clean soil without the use of most agricultural  chemicals.  Fresh Produce and Food Poisoning  Though we generally associate outbreaks of food poisoning with foods derived  from animals, fruits and vegetables are also a significant source. They have caused  outbreaks of nearly every major food pathogen known (see box below). There are  several reasons for this. Fruits and vegetables are grown in the soil, a vast reservoir  of microbes. Field facilities for the harvesting crew (toilets, wash water) and for  processing   and   packing   may   not   be   hygienic,   so   the   produce   is   easily  contaminated by people, containers, and machinery. And produce is often eaten  raw. Salad bars in restaurants and cafeterias can collect and grow bacteria for  hours, and have been associated with many outbreaks of food poisoning. Fruit  juices, often made by crushing whole fruits, are readily contaminated by a small  number of infected pieces; so fresh cider has become hard to find. Nearly all juice  production in the United States is now pasteurized.  The prudent consumer will thoroughly wash all produce, including fruits whose  skins will be discarded (knives and fingers can introduce surface bacteria to the  flesh). Soapy water and commercial produce washes are more effective than water  alone.   Washing   can   reduce   microbial   populations   a   hundredfold,   but   it’s  impossible to eliminate all microbes from uncooked lettuce and other produce —  they can evade even heavily chlorinated water by hiding in microscopic pores and  cracks in the plant tissue. Raw salads are therefore not advised for people who are  especially vulnerable to infections. Once fruits and vegetables have been cut up,  they should be kept refrigerated and used as soon as possible.
Disease Outbreaks Caused by Raw Fruits and Vegetables  This selected list demonstrates that raw produce is capable of causing a wide  range of food-borne illnesses. These disease outbreaks are not common or a  cause for great concern, but they do mean that produce should be prepared  carefully, and ideally should be cooked for people with weak immune systems  — the very young and very old and people suffering from other illnesses.  Microbe   Food  Clostridium  botulinum  Garlic in oil  E. coli   Salad bars, alfalfa and radish sprouts, melons, apple  juice  Listeria   Cabbage (long cold storage)  Salmonella   Salad bars, alfalfa sprouts, orange juice, melons,  tomatoes  Shigella   Parsley, lettuce  Staphylococcus   Prepared salads  Vibrio cholerae   Fruits and vegetables contaminated by water  Yersinia   Sprouts contaminated by water  Cyclospora  (protozoa)  Berries, lettuce  Hepatitis viruses   Strawberries, scallions  The Composition and Qualities of Fruits and  Vegetables  What makes a vegetable tender or tough? Why do leafy greens shrink so much  when cooked? Why do apples and avocados turn brown when cut open? Why are  green potatoes dangerous? Why do some fruits get sweet in the bowl, and others
just older? The key to understanding these and other characteristics is a familiarity  with the structural and chemical makeup of plant tissues.  Plant Structure: Cells, Tissues, and Organs  The Plant Cell   Like animals, plants are built up out of innumerable microscopic  chambers called cells. Each cell is surrounded and contained by a thin, balloon-like  cell membrane constructed from certain fat-like molecules and proteins, and  permeable to water and other small molecules. Immediately inside the membrane  is a fluid called the   cytoplasm,   which is filled with much of the complex chemical  machinery necessary to the cell’s growth and function. Then within the cytoplasm  float a variety of other membrane-contained bags, each with its own chemical  nature. Nearly all plant cells contain a large watery   vacuole,   which may be filled  with enzymes, sugars, acids, proteins, water-soluble pigments, and waste or  defensive compounds. Often one large vacuole will fill 90% of the cell volume and  squeeze the cytoplasm and   nucleus   (the body that contains most of the cell’s DNA)  up   against   the   cell   membrane.   Leaf   cells   contain   dozens   to   hundreds   of  chloroplasts,   bags filled with green chlorophyll and other molecules that do the  work of photosynthesis. The cells of fruits often contain   chromoplasts,   which  concentrate yellow, orange, and red pigments that are soluble in fat. And storage  cells are often filled with   amyloplasts,   which hold many granules of the long sugar  chains called starch.
Cross-section through a typical plant cell.  The Cell Wall   One last and very important component of the plant cell is its   cell  wall,   something that animal cells lack entirely. The plant cell wall surrounds the  membrane and is strong and rigid. Its purpose is to lend structural support to the  cell and the tissue of which it is a part. Neighboring cells are held together by the  outer, glue-like layers of their cell walls. Some specialized strengthening cells  become mostly cell wall and do their job even after their death. The gritty grains in  pear flesh, the fibers in celery stalks, the stone that surrounds a peach seed, and  the   seed   coats   of   beans   and peas   are   all   mainly   the   cell-wall   material   of  strengthening cells.  Broadly speaking, the texture of plant foods is determined by the fullness of the  storage vacuole, the strength of the cell walls, and the absence or presence of  starch granules. Color is determined by the chloroplasts and chromoplasts, and  sometimes by water-soluble pigments in vacuoles. Flavor comes from the contents  of the storage vacuoles.  Plant Tissues   Tissues are groups of cells organized to perform a common function.  Plants have four basic tissues.  Ground tissue   is the primary mass of cells. Its purpose depends on its location in  the plant. In leaves the ground tissue performs photosynthesis; elsewhere it stores  nutrients and water. Cells in the ground tissue usually have thin cell walls, so the  tissue is generally tender. Most of our fruits and vegetables are mainly ground  tissue.  Vascular tissue   runs through the ground tissue, and resembles our veins and  arteries. It is the system of microscopic tubes that transport nutrients throughout  the plant. The work is divided between two subsystems:   xylem,   which takes water  and minerals from the roots to the rest of the plant, and   phloem,   which conducts  sugars down from the leaves. Vascular tissue usually provides mechanical support  as well, and is often tough and fibrous compared to the surrounding tissue.  Dermal tissue   forms the outer surface of the plant, the layer that protects it and  helps it retain its moisture. It may take the form of either   epidermis   or   periderm.   The  epidermis is usually a single layer of cells that secretes several surface coatings,  including a fatty material called cutin, and wax (long molecules made by joining
fatty acids with alcohols), which is what makes many fruits naturally take a shine.  Periderm is found instead of epidermis on underground organs and older tissues,  and has a dull, corky appearance. Our culinary experience of periderm is usually  limited to the skins of potatoes, beets, and so on.  Secretory tissue   usually occurs as isolated cells on the surface or within the plant.  These cells correspond to the oil and sweat glands in our skin, and produce and  store various aroma compounds, often to attract or repel animals. The large mint  family, which includes other common herbs like thyme and basil, is characterized  by glandular hairs on stems and leaves that contain aromatic oils. Vegetables in the  carrot family concentrate their aromatic substances in inner secretory cells.  The three kinds of plant tissue in a stem. Fibrous vascular tissue and thick dermal  layers are common causes of toughness in vegetables.  Plant Organs   There are six major plant organs: the root, the stem, the leaf, the  flower, the fruit, and the seed. We’ll take a closer look at seeds in chapter 9.  Roots   Roots anchor the plant in the ground, and absorb and conduct moisture and  nutrients to the rest of the plant. Most roots are tough, fibrous, and barely edible.  The exceptions are roots that swell up with nonfibrous storage cells; they allow  plants to survive temperate-zone winter to flower in their second year (carrots,  parsnips, radishes) or seasonal dryness in the tropics (sweet potatoes, manioc).  Root vegetables develop this storage area in different ways, and so have different  anatomies. In the carrot, storage tissue forms around the central vascular core,  which is less flavorful. The beet produces concentric layers of storage and vascular
tissue, and in some varieties these accumulate different pigments, so their slices  appear striped.  Stems, Stalks, Tubers, and Rhizomes   Stems and stalks have the main function of  conducting nutrients between the root and leaves, and providing support for the  aboveground organs. They therefore tend to become fibrous, which is why  asparagus and broccoli stems often need to be peeled before cooking, celery and  cardoon stalks deveined. The junction between stem and root, which is called the  hypocotl,   can swell into a storage organ; turnips, celery “root,” and beets are  actually part stem, part root. And some plants, including the potato, yam,  sunchoke, and ginger, have developed special underground stem structures for  nonsexual reproduction: they “clone” themselves by forming a storage organ that  can produce its own roots and stem and become an independent — but  genetically identical — plant. The common potato and true yam are such swollen  underground stem tips called   tubers,   while the sunchoke and ginger “root” are  horizontal underground stems called   rhizomes.  Leaves   Leaves specialize in the production of high-energy sugar molecules via  photosynthesis, a process that requires exposure to sunlight and a good supply of  carbon dioxide. They therefore contain very little storage or strengthening tissue  that would interfere with access to light or air, and are the most fragile and short-  lived parts of the plant. To maximize light capture, the leaf is flattened out into a  thin sheet with a large surface area, and the photosynthetic cells are heavily  populated with chloroplasts. To promote gas exchange, the leaf interior is filled  with thousands of tiny air pockets, which further increase the area of cells exposed  to the air. Some leaves are as much as 70% air by volume. This structure helps  explain why leafy vegetables shrink so much when cooked: heat collapses the  spongy   interior.   (It   also   wilts   the   leaves   so   that   they   pack   together   more  compactly.)
Cross section of a leaf. Because photosynthesis requires a continuous supply of carbon  dioxide, leaf tissue often has a spongy structure that directly exposes many inner cells  to the air.  An exception to the rule against storage tissue in leaves is the onion family (tulips  and other bulb ornamentals are exceptions as well). The many layers of the onion  (and the single layer of a garlic clove) surrounding the small inner stem are the  swollen bases of leaves whose tops die and fall off. The leaf bases store water and  carbohydrates during the plant’s first year of growth so that they can be used  during the second, when it will flower and produce seed.  Flowers   Flowers are the plant’s reproductive organs. Here the male pollen and  female ovules are formed; here too they unite in the chamber that contains the  ovules, the ovary, and develop into embryos and seeds. Flowers are often  brilliantly colored and aromatic to attract pollinating insects, and can be a striking  ingredient. However, some familiar plants protect their flowers from animal  predators with toxins, so their edibility should be checked before use (p. 326). We  also eat a few flowers or their supporting tissues before they mature; broccoli,  cauliflower, and artichokes are examples.  Fruits   The fruit is the organ derived from the flower’s ovary (or adjacent stem  tissue). It contains the seeds, and promotes their dispersal away from the mother  plant. Some fruits are inedible — they’re designed to catch the wind, or the fur of a  passing animal — but the fruits that we eat were made by the plant to be eaten, so  that an animal would intentionally take it and the seeds away. The fruit has no  support, nutrition, or transport responsibilities to the other organs. It therefore
consists   almost   entirely   of   storage   tissue   filled   with   appealing   and   useful  substances for animals. When ready and ripe, it’s usually the most flavorful and  tenderest part of the plant.  Texture  The texture of raw fruits and vegetables can be crisp and juicy, soft and melting,  mealy and dry, or flabby and chewy. These qualities are a reflection of the way the  plant tissues break apart as we chew. And their breaking behavior depends on two  main factors: the construction of their cell walls, and the amount of water held in  by those walls.  The cell walls of our fruits and vegetables have two structural materials: tough  fibers of cellulose that act as a kind of framework, and a semisolid, flexible mixture  of water, carbohydrates, minerals, and proteins that cross-link the fibers and fill the  space between them. We can think of the semisolid mixture as a kind of cement  whose stiffness varies according to the proportions of its ingredients. The cellulose  fibers act as reinforcing bars in that cement. Neighboring cells are held together by  the cement where their walls meet.  Crisp Tenderness: The Roles of Water Pressure and Temperature   Cell walls are  thus firm but flexible containers. The cells that they contain are mostly water. When  water is abundant and a cell approaches its maximum storage capacity, the  vacuole swells and presses the surrounding cytoplasm (p. 261) against the cell  membrane, which in turn presses against the cell wall. The flexible wall bulges to  accommodate the swollen cell. The pressure exerted against each other by many  bulging cells — which can reach 50 times the pressure of the surrounding air —  results in a full, firm, turgid fruit or vegetable. But if the cells are low on water, the  mutually supporting pressure disappears, the flexible cell walls sag, and the tissue  becomes limp and flaccid.  Water and walls determine texture. A vegetable that is fully moist and firm will  seem both crisp and more tender than the same vegetable limp from water loss.  When we bite down on a vegetable turgid with water, the already-stressed cell  walls readily break and the cells burst open; in a limp vegetable, chewing  compresses the walls together, and we have to exert much more pressure to break  through them. The moist vegetable is crisp and juicy, the limp one chewy and less  juicy. Fortunately, water loss is largely reversible: soak a limp vegetable in water for
a few hours and its cells will absorb water and reinflate. Crispness can also be  enhanced by making sure that the vegetable is icy cold. This makes the cell-wall  cement stiff, so that when it breaks under pressure, it seems brittle.  Wilting in vegetables. Plant tissue that is well supplied with water is filled with fluids  and mechanically rigid (left) . Loss of water causes cell vacuoles to shrink. The cells  become partly empty, the cell walls sag, and the tissue weakens (right).  Mealiness and Meltingness: The Role of Cell Walls   Fruits and vegetables can  sometimes have a mealy, grainy, dry texture. This results when the cement  between neighboring cells is weak, so that chewing breaks the cells apart from  each other rather than breaking them open, and we end up with lots of tiny  separate cells in our mouth. Then there’s the soft, melting texture of a ripe peach or  melon. This too is a manifestation of weakened cell walls, but here the weakening  is so extreme that the walls have practically disintegrated, and the watery cell  interior oozes out under the least pressure. The contents of the cells also have an  effect: a ripe fruit’s vacuole full of sugar solution will give a melting, succulent  impression, while a potato’s solid starch grains will contribute a firm chalkiness.  Because starch absorbs water when heated, cooked starchy tissue becomes moist  but mealy or pasty, never juicy.
The softening of plant cell walls. The walls are made up of a framework of cellulose  fibers embedded in a mass of amorphous materials, including the pectins (left). When  cooked in boiling water, the cellulose fibers remain intact, but the amorphous  materials are partly extracted into fluids from within the cells, thus weakening the  walls (right) and tenderizing the vegetable or fruit.  The changes in texture that occur during ripening and cooking result from  changes in the cell-wall materials, in particular the cement carbohydrates. One  group   is   the   hemicelluloses,   which   form   strengthening   cross-links   between  celluloses. They are built up from glucose and xylose sugars, and can be partly  dissolved   and   removed   from   cell   walls   during   cooking   (p.   282). The   other  important component is the pectic substances, large branched chains of a sugar-  like molecule called galacturonic acid, which bond together into a gel that fills the  spaces between cellulose fibers. Pectins can be either dissolved or consolidated by  cooking, and their gel-like consistency is exploited in the making of fruit jellies and  jams (p. 296). When fruits soften during ripening, their enzymes weaken the cell  walls by modifying the pectins.  Tough Cellulose and Lignin   Cellulose, the other major cell-wall component, is  very resistant to change, and this is one reason that it’s the most abundant plant  product on earth. Like starch, cellulose consists of a chain of glucose sugar  molecules. But a difference in the way they’re linked to each other allows  neighboring chains to bond tightly together into fibers that are invulnerable to
human digestive enzymes and all but extreme heat or chemical treatment.  Cellulose becomes most visible to us in the winter as hay, a stubble field, or the  fine skeletons of weeds. This remarkable stability makes cellulose valuable to long-  lived trees and to the human species as well. Wood is one-third cellulose, and  cotton and linen fibers are almost pure cellulose. However, cellulose is a problem  for the cook: it simply can’t be softened by normal kitchen techniques. Sometimes,  as in the gritty “stone cells” of pears, quince, and guava, this is a relatively minor  distraction. But when it’s concentrated to provide structural support in stems and  stalks — in celery and cardoons, for example — cellulose makes vegetables  permanently stringy, and the only remedy is to pull the fibers from the tissue.  One last cell wall component is seldom significant in food. Lignin is also a  strengthening agent and very resistant to breakdown; it’s the defining ingredient  of wood. Most vegetables are harvested well in advance of appreciable lignin  formation, but occasionally we do deal with woody asparagus and broccoli stems.  The only remedy for this kind of toughness is to peel away the lignified areas.  Color  Plant pigments are one of life’s glories! The various greens of forest and field, the  purples and yellows and reds of fruits and flowers — these colors speak to us of  vitality, renewal, and the sheer pleasure of sensation. Some pigments are designed  to catch our eye, some actually become part of our eye, and some made possible  the very existence of us and our eyes (see box, p. 271). Many turn out to have  beneficial effects on our health. The cook’s challenge is to preserve the vividness  and appeal of these remarkable molecules.  There are four families of plant pigments, each with different functions in the  plant’s life and different behaviors in the kitchen. All of them are large molecules  that appear to be a certain color because they absorb certain wavelengths of light,  and thus leave only parts of the spectrum for our eyes to detect. Chlorophylls are  green, for example, because they absorb red and blue wavelengths.  Green Chlorophylls   The earth is painted green with chlorophylls, the molecules  that harvest solar energy and funnel it into the photosynthetic system that  converts it into sugar molecules. Chlorophyll   a   is bright blue-green, chlorophyll   b   a  more muted olive color. The   a   form dominates the   b   by 3 to 1 in most leaves, but  the balance is evener in plants that grow in the shade, and in aging tissues, where
the   a   form is degraded faster. The chlorophylls are concentrated in cell bodies  called chloroplasts, where they’re embedded in the many folds of a membrane  along with the other molecules of the photosynthetic system. Each chlorophyll  molecule is made up of two parts. One is a ring of carbon and nitrogen atoms with  a magnesium atom at the center, quite similar to the heme ring in the meat  myoglobin pigment (p. 133). This ring portion is soluble in water, and does the  work of absorbing light. The second part is a fat-soluble tail of 16 carbon atoms,  which anchors the whole molecule in the chloroplast membrane. This part is  colorless.  These complex molecules are readily altered when their membrane home is  disrupted during cooking. This is why the bright green of fresh vegetables is  fragile. Ironically, prolonged exposure to intense light also damages chlorophylls.  Attention to cooking times, temperatures, and acidities are thus essential to  serving bright green vegetables (p. 280).  Yellow, Orange, Red Carotenoids   Carotenoids   are so named because the first  member of this large family to be chemically isolated came from carrots. These  pigments absorb blue and green wavelengths and are responsible for most of the  yellow and orange colors in fruits and vegetables (beta-carotene, xanthophylls,  zeaxanthin), as well as the red of tomatoes, watermelons, and chillis (lycopene,  capsanthin, and capsorubin; most red colors in plants are caused by anthocyanins).  Carotenoids are zigzag chains of around 40 carbon atoms and thus resemble fat  molecules (p. 797). They’re generally soluble in fats and oils and are relatively  stable, so they tend to stay bright and stay put when a food is cooked in water.  Carotenoids are found in two different places in plant cells. One is in special  pigment bodies, or chromoplasts, which signal animals that a flower is open for  business or a fruit is ripe. Their other home is the photosynthetic membranes of  chloroplasts,   where   there   is   one   carotenoid   molecule   for   every   five   or   so  chlorophylls. Their main role there is to protect chlorophyll and other parts of the  photosynthetic system. They absorb potentially damaging wavelengths in the light  spectrum, and act as antioxidants by soaking up the many high-energy chemical  by-products generated in photosynthesis. They can do the same in the human  body, particularly in the eye (p. 256). Chloroplast carotenoids are usually invisible,  their presence masked by green chlorophyll, but it’s a good rule of thumb that the  darker green the vegetable, the more chloroplasts and chlorophyll it contains, and  the more carotenoids as well.
About ten carotenoids have a nutritional as well as aesthetic significance: they are  converted to vitamin A in the human intestinal wall. Of these the most common  and active is beta-carotene. Strictly speaking, only animals and animal-derived  foods contain vitamin A itself; fruits and vegetables contain only its precursors. But  without these pigment precursors there would be no vitamin A in animals either.  In the eye, vitamin A becomes part of the receptor molecule that detects light and  allows us to see. Elsewhere in the body it has a number of other important roles.  Red and Purple Anthocyanins, Pale Yellow Anthoxanthins   Anthocyanins (from  the Greek for “blue flower”) are responsible for most of the red, purple, and blue  colors in plants, including many berries, apples, cabbage, radishes, and potatoes. A  related group, the anthoxanthins (“yellow flower”) are pale yellow compounds  found in potatoes, onions, and cauliflower. This third major class of plant pigments  is a subgroup of the huge phenolic family, which is based on rings of 6 carbon  atoms with two-thirds of a water molecule (OH) attached to some of them, which  makes phenolics soluble in water. The anthocyanins have 3 rings. There are about  300 known anthocyanins, and a given fruit or vegetable will usually contain a  mixture of a dozen or more. Like many other phenolic compounds, they are  valuable antioxidants (p. 255).  Anthocyanins and anthoxanthins reside in the storage vacuole of plant cells, and  readily bleed into surrounding tissues and ingredients when cell structures are  damaged by cooking. This is why the lovely color of purple-tinted asparagus,  beans, and other vegetables often disappears with cooking: the pigment is stored  in just the outer layers of cells, and gets diluted to invisibility when the cooked  cells break open. The main function of the anthocyanins is to provide signaling  colors in flowers and fruits, though they may have begun their career as light-  absorbing protection for the photosynthetic systems in young leaves (see box, p.  271). Anthocyanins are very sensitive to the acid-alkaline balance of foods —  alkalinity shifts their color to the blue — and they’re altered by traces of metals, so  they are often the source of strange off-colors in cooked foods (p. 281).
The three major kinds of plant pigments. For the sake of clarity, most hydrogen atoms  are left unlabeled; dots indicate carbon atoms. Top: Beta-carotene, the most common  carotenoid pigment, and the source of the orange color of carrots. The long fat-like  carbon chain makes these pigments much more soluble in fats and oils than in water.  Bottom left: Chlorophyll a, the main source of the green in vegetables and fruits, with a  heme-like region (p. 133) and a long carbon tail that makes chlorophyll more soluble  in fats and oils than in water. Bottom right: Cyanidin, a blue pigment in the  anthocyanin family. Thanks to their several hydroxyl (OH) groups, anthocyanins are  water-soluble, and readily leak out of boiled vegetables.  Red and Yellow Betains   A fourth group of plant pigments is the betains, which are  only found in a handful of distantly related species. However, these include three  popular and vividly colored vegetables: beets and chard (both varieties of the  same species), amaranth, and the prickly pear, the fruit of a cactus. The betains  (sometimes called betalains) are complex nitrogen-containing molecules that are  otherwise similar to anthocyanins: they are water-soluble, sensitive to heat and  light, and tend toward the blue in alkaline conditions. There are about 50 red  betains and 20 yellow betaxanthins, combinations of which produce the almost  fluorescent-looking stem and vein colors of novelty chards. The human body has a  limited ability to metabolize these molecules, so a large dose of red beets or  prickly pears can give a startling but harmless tinge to the urine. The red betains  contain a phenolic group and are good antioxidants; yellow betaxanthins don’t  and aren’t.
Leaves and Fruits Shaped Our Vision  We can distinguish and enjoy the many hues of anthocyanin- and carotenoid-  rich plants — as well as the same hues in paintings and clothing, makeup and  warning signs — because our eyes are designed to see well in this color range  of yellow to orange to red. It now looks as though we owe this ability to leaves  and fruits! It turns out that we are among a small handful of animal species  with eyes that can distinguish red from green. The other species are tropical  forest–dwelling primates like our probable ancestors, and they have in  common a need to detect their foods against the green of the forest canopy.  The young leaves of many tropical plants are red with anthocyanins, which  apparently absorb excess solar energy during the momentary shafts of direct  sunlight in an otherwise shaded life; and young leaves are more tender than  the older, green, fibrous leaves, more easily digested and nutritious, and more  sought after by monkeys. Without good red vision, it would be hard to find  them — or carotenoid-colored fruits — among the green leaves. So leaves  and fruits shaped our vision. The pleasure we take today in their colors was  made possible by our ancestors’ hunger, and the sustenance they found in  red-tinged leaves and yellow-orange fruits.  Discoloration: Enzymatic Browning   Many fruits and vegetables — for example  apples, bananas, mushrooms, potatoes — quickly develop a brown, red, or gray  discoloration when cut or bruised. This discoloration is caused by three chemical  ingredients: 1- and 2-ring phenolic compounds, certain plant enzymes, and  oxygen. In the intact fruit or vegetable, the phenolic compounds are kept in the  storage vacuole, the enzymes in the surrounding cytoplasm. When the cell  structure is damaged and phenolics are mixed with enzymes and oxygen, the  enzymes oxidize the phenolics, forming molecules that eventually react with each  other and bond together into light-absorbing clusters. This system is one of the  plant’s chemical defenses: when insects or microbes damage its cells, the plant  releases reactive phenolics that attack the invaders’ own enzymes and membranes.  The brown pigments that we see are essentially masses of spent weapons. (A  similar kind of enzyme acting on a similar compound is responsible for the  “browning” of humans in the sun; here the pigment itself is the protective agent.)
Minimizing Brown Discoloration   Enzymatic browning can be discouraged by  several means. The single handiest method for the cook is to coat cut surfaces with  lemon juice: the browning enzymes work very slowly in acidic conditions. Chilling  the food below about 40ºF/4ºC will also slow the enzymes down somewhat, as will  immersing the cut pieces in cold water, which limits the availability of oxygen. In  the case of precut lettuce for salads, enzyme activity and browning can be reduced  by immersing the freshly cut leaves in a pot of water at 115ºF/47ºC for three  minutes before chilling and bagging them. Boiling temperatures will destroy the  enzyme, so cooking will eliminate the problem. However, high temperatures can  encourage phenolic oxidation in the absence of enzymes: this is why the water in  which vegetables have been cooked sometimes turns brown on standing. Various  sulfur compounds will combine with the phenolic substances and block their  reaction with the enzyme, and these are often applied commercially to dried fruits.  Sulfured apples and apricots retain their natural color and flavor, while unsulfured  dried fruits turn brown and develop a more cooked flavor.  Another acid that inhibits browning by virtue of its antioxidant properties is  ascorbic acid, or vitamin C. It was first identified around 1925 when the Hungarian  biochemist Albert Szent-Györgyi found that the juice of some nonbrowning plants,  including the chillis grown for paprika, could delay the discoloration of plants that  do brown, and he isolated the responsible substance.  Browning Enzymes, Breath Fresheners, and the Order of the Meal  The browning enzymes are normally considered a nuisance, because they  discolor foods as we prepare them. Recently a group of Japanese scientists  found a constructive use for their oxidizing activities: they can help clear our  breath of persistent garlic, onion, and other sulfurous odors! The reactive  phenolic chemicals produced by the enzymes combine with sulfhydryl  groups to form new and odorless molecules. (Phenolic catechins in green tea  do the same.) Many raw fruits and vegetables are effective at this, notably  pome and stone fruits, grapes, blueberries, mushrooms, lettuces, burdock,  basil, and peppermint. This may be one of the benefits of ending a meal with  fruit, and one of the reasons that some cultures serve a salad after the main
course, not before.  Brown discoloration caused by plant enzymes. When the cells in certain fruits and  vegetables are damaged by cutting, bruising, or biting, browning enzymes in the cell  cytoplasm come into contact with small, colorless phenolic molecules from the  storage vacuole. With the help of oxygen from the air, the enzymes bind the phenolic  molecules together into large, colored assemblies that turn the damaged area brown.  Flavor  The overall flavor of a fruit or vegetable is a composite of several distinct  sensations. From the taste buds on our tongues, we register salts, sweet sugars,  sour acids, savory amino acids, and bitter alkaloids. From the cells in our mouth  sensitive to touch, we notice the presence of astringent, puckery tannins. A variety  of cells in and near the mouth are irritated by the pungent compounds in peppers,  mustard, and members of the onion family. Finally, the olfactory receptors in our  nasal passages can detect many hundreds of volatile molecules that are small and  chemically repelled by water, and therefore fly out of the food and into the air in  our mouth. The sensations from our mouth give us an idea of a food’s basic  composition and qualities, while our sense of smell allows us to make much finer  discriminations.  Taste: Salty, Sweet, Sour, Savory, Bitter   Of the five generally recognized tastes,  three are especially prominent in fruits and vegetables. Sugar is the main product  of photosynthesis, and its sweetness is the main attraction provided by fruits for  their animal seed dispersers. The average sugar content of ripe fruit is 10 to 15% by
weight. Often the unripe fruit stores its sugar as tasteless starch, which is then  converted back into sugar during ripening to make the fruit more appealing. At  the same time, the fruit’s acid content usually drops, a development that makes  the fruit seem even sweeter. There are several organic acids — citric, malic, tartaric,  oxalic — that plants can accumulate in their vacuoles and variously use as  alternative energy stores, chemical defenses, or metabolic   wastes,   and that  account for the acidity of most fruits and vegetables (all are acid to some degree).  The sweet-sour balance is especially important in fruits.  Most vegetables contain only moderate amounts of sugar and acid, and these are  quickly used up by the plant cells after harvest. This is why vegetables picked just  before cooking are more full-flavored than store-bought produce, which is usually  days to weeks from the field.  Bitter tastes are generally encountered only among vegetables and seeds (for  example, coffee and cocoa beans), which contain alkaloids and other chemical  defenses meant to discourage animals from eating them. Farmers and plant  breeders have worked for thousands of years to reduce the bitterness of such  crops as lettuce, cucumbers, eggplants, and cabbage, but chicory and radicchio,  various cabbage relatives, and the Asian bitter gourd are actually prized for their  bitterness. In many cultures, bitterness is thought to be a manifestation of  medicinal value and therefore of healthfulness, and there may be some truth to  this association (p. 334).  Though savory, mouth-filling amino acids are more characteristic of protein-rich  animal foods, some fruits and vegetables do contain significant quantities of  glutamic acid, the active portion of MSG. Notable among them are tomatoes,  oranges, and many seaweeds. The glutamic acid in tomatoes, together with its  balanced sweetness and acidity, may help explain why this fruit is so successfully  used as a vegetable, both with meats and without.  Touch: Astringency   Astringency is neither a taste nor an aroma, but a tactile  sensation: that dry, puckery, rough feeling that follows a sip of strong tea or red  wine, or a bite into an unripe banana or peach. It is caused by a group of phenolic  compounds consisting of 3 to 5 carbon rings, which are just the right size to span  two or more normally separate protein molecules, bond to them, and hold them  together. These phenolics are called   tannins   because they have been used since  prehistory to tan animal hides into tough leather by bonding with the skin  proteins. The sensation of astringency is caused when tannins bond to proteins in
our saliva, which normally provide lubrication and help food particles slide  smoothly along the mouth surfaces. Tannins cause the proteins to clump together  and stick to particles and surfaces, increasing the friction between them. Tannins  are another of the plant kingdom’s chemical defenses. They counteract bacteria  and fungi by interfering with their surface proteins, and deter plant-eating animals  by their astringency and by interfering with digestive enzymes. Tannins are most  often found in immature fruit (to prevent their consumption before the seeds are  viable),   in   the   skins   of   nuts,   and   in   plant   parts   strongly   pigmented   with  anthocyanins, phenolic molecules that turn out to be the right size to cross-link  proteins. Red-leaf lettuces, for example, are noticeably more astringent than green.  Though a degree of astringency can be desirable in a dish or drink — it contributes  a feeling of substantialness — it often becomes tiresome. The problem is that the  sensation becomes stronger with each dose of tannins (whereas most flavors  become less prominent), and it lingers, with the duration also increasing with each  exposure. So it’s worth knowing how to control astringency (p. 284).  Irritation: Pungency   The sensations caused by “hot” spices and vegetables —  chillis, black pepper, ginger, mustard, horse-radish, onions, and garlic — are most  accurately described as irritation and pain (for why we can enjoy such sensations,  seep. 394). The active ingredients in all of these are chemical defenses that are  meant to annoy and repel animal attackers. Very reactive sulfur compounds in the  mustard and onion families apparently do mild damage to the unprotected cell  membranes in our mouth and nasal passages, and thus cause pain. The pungent  principles of the peppers and ginger, and some of the mustard compounds, work  differently; they bind to a specific receptor on the cell membranes, and the  receptor then triggers reactions in the cell that cause it to send a pain signal to the  brain. The mustard and onion defenses are created only when tissue damage  mixes together normally separate enzymes and their targets. Because enzymes are  inactivated by cooking temperatures, cooking will moderate the pungency of  these foods. By contrast, the peppers and ginger stockpile their defenses ahead of  time, and cooking doesn’t reduce their pungency.  The nature and use of pungent ingredients are described in greater detail in the  next several chapters, in entries on particular vegetables and spices.  Aroma: Variety and Complexity   The subject of aroma is both daunting and  endlessly fascinating! Daunting because it involves many hundreds of different
chemicals and sensations for which we don’t have a good everyday vocabulary;  fascinating because it helps us perceive more, and find more to enjoy, in the most  familiar foods. There are two basic facts to keep in mind when thinking about the  aroma of any food. First, the distinctive aromas of particular foods are created by  specific volatile chemicals that are characteristic of those foods. And second, nearly  all food aromas are composites of many different volatile molecules. In the case of  vegetables, herbs, and spices, the number may be a dozen or two, while fruits  typically emit several hundred volatile molecules. Usually just a handful create the  dominant element of an aroma, while the others supply background, supporting,  enriching notes. This combination of specificity and complexity helps explain why  we find echoes of one food in another, or find that two foods go well together.  Some affinities result when the foods happen to share some of the same aroma  molecules.  One way to approach the richness of plant flavors is to taste actively and with  other people. Rather than simply recognizing a familiar flavor as what you expect,  try to dissect that flavor into some of its component sensations, just as a musical  chord can be broken down into its component notes. Run through a checklist of  the possibilities, and ask: Is there a green-grass note in this aroma? A fruity note? A  spicy or nutty or earthy note? If so, which kind of fruit or spice or nut? Chapters 6–8  give interesting facts about the aromas of particular fruits, vegetables, herbs, and  spices.  Aroma Families   The box on pp. 274–275 identifies some of the more prominent  aromas to be found in plant foods. Though I’ve divided them by type of food, this  division is arbitrary. Fruits may have green-leaf aromas; vegetables may contain  chemicals more characteristic of fruits or spices; spices and herbs share many  aromatics with fruits. Some examples: cherries and bananas contain the dominant  element of cloves; coriander contains aromatics that are prominent in citrus  flowers and fruits; carrots share piney aromatics with Mediterranean herbs. While a  given plant does usually specialize in the production of a certain kind of aromatic,  plants in general are biochemical virtuosos, and may operate a number of different  aromatic production lines at once. Some of the most important production lines  are these:  •   “Green,”   cucumber/melon,   and   mushroom   aromas,   produced   from  unsaturated fatty acids in cell membranes when tissue damage mixes an  oxidizing   enzyme   (lipoxygenase)   with   unsaturated   fatty   acids   in   cell
membranes. This enzyme breaks the long fatty acid chains into small, volatile  pieces, and other enzymes then modify the pieces.  •   “Fruity” aromas, produced when enzymes in the intact fruit combine an acid  molecule with an alcohol molecule to produce an   ester.  •   “Terpene” aromas, produced by a long series of enzymes from small building  blocks that also get turned into carotenoid pigments and other important  molecules. They range from flowery to citrusy, minty, herbaceous, and piney  (p. 391).  •   “Phenolic” aromas, produced by a series of enzymes from an amino acid with  a 6-carbon ring. These are offshoots of the biochemical pathway that makes  woody lignin (p. 266), and include many spicy, warming, and pungent  molecules (p. 391).  •   “Sulfur” aromatics, usually produced when tissue damage mixes enzymes  with nonaromatic aroma precursors. Most sulfur aromatics are pungent  chemical defenses, though some give a more subtle depth to a number of  fruits and vegetables.  Fascinating and useful as it is to analyze the flavors of the plant world, the greatest  pleasure still comes from savoring them whole. This is one of the great gifts of life  in the natural world, as Henry David Thoreau reminded us:  Some gnarly apple which I pick up in the road reminds by its fragrance of all  the wealth of Pomona. There is thus about all natural products a certain  volatile and ethereal quality which represents their highest value…. For  nectar and ambrosia are only those fine flavors of every earthly fruit which  our coarse palates fail to perceive,— just as we occupy the heaven of the  gods without knowing it.
Some of the Aromas in Foods from Plants  This table provides a quick overview of the kinds of aromas found in plant  foods, where they come from, and how they behave when the food is cooked.  Aroma   Examples  Chemicals  responsible   Origin   Characteristics  Vegetables  “Green leaf”:  fresh-cut  leaves, grass  Most green  vegetables;  also  tomatoes,  apples, other  fruits  Alcohols,  aldehydes (6-  carbon)  Cutting or crushing;  enzyme action on  unsaturated cell  membrane lipids  Delicate, reduced  by cooking (stops  enzymes, alters  chemicals)  Cucumber   Cucumbers,  melons  Alcohols,  aldehydes (9-  carbon)  Cutting or crushing;  enzyme action on  unsaturated cell  membranes  Delicate, reduced  by cooking (stops  enzymes, alters  chemicals)  “Green  vegetable”  Bell peppers,  fresh peas  Pyrazines   Preformed   Strong, persistent  Earthy   Potatoes,  beets  Pyrazines,  geosmin  Preformed   Strong, persistent  Fresh  Mushroom  Mushrooms   Alcohols,  aldehydes (8-  carbon)  Cutting or crushing;  enzyme action on  unsaturated cell  membrane lipids  Delicate, reduced  by cooking (stops  enzymes, alters  chemicals)  Cabbage-like   Cabbage  family  Sulfur  compounds  Cutting or crushing;  enzyme action on  sulfur-containing  precursors  Strong, persistent,  altered and  strengthened by  cooking  Onion-like,  mustard-like  Onion family   Sulfur  compounds  Cutting or crushing;  enzyme action on  sulfur-containing  precursors  Strong, persistent,  altered and  strengthened by  cooking  Floral   Edible flowers   Alcohols,  terpenes,  esters  Preformed   Delicate, altered  by cooking  Fruits
Aroma   Examples  Chemicals  responsible   Origin   Characteristics  “Fruity”   Apple, pear,  banana,  pineapple,  strawberry  Esters (acid +  alcohol)  Preformed   Delicate, altered  by cooking  Citrus   Citrus family   Terpenes   Preformed   Persistent  “Fatty,”  “creamy”  Peach,  coconut  Lactones   Preformed   Persistent  Caramel, nutty   Strawberry,  pineapple  Furanones   Preformed   Persistent  Tropical fruit,  “exotic,” musky  Grapefruit,  passion fruit,  mango,  pineapple,  melon;  tomato  Sulfur  compounds,  complex  Preformed   Persistent  Herbs & Spices  Pine-like, mint-  like,  herbaceous  Sage, thyme,  rosemary,  mint, nutmeg  Terpenes   Preformed   Strong, persistent  Spicy, warming   Cinnamon,  clove, anise,  basil, vanilla  Phenolic  compounds  Preformed   Strong, persistent  Handling and Storing Fruits and Vegetables  Post-Harvest Deterioration  There’s no match for the flavor of a vegetable picked one minute and cooked the  next. Once a vegetable is harvested it begins to change, and that change is almost  always for the worse. (Exceptions include plant parts designed to hibernate, for  example onions and potatoes.) Plant cells are hardier than animal cells, and may  survive for weeks or even months. But cut off from their source of renovating  nutrients, they consume themselves and accumulate waste products, and their  flavor and texture suffer. Many varieties of corn and peas lose half their sugar in a
few hours at room temperature, either by converting it to starch or using it for  energy to stay alive. Bean pods, asparagus, and broccoli begin to use their sugar to  make tough lignified fibers. As crisp, crunchy lettuce and celery use up their water,  their cells lose turgor pressure and they become limp and chewy (p. 265).  Fruits are a different story. Some fruits may actually get better after harvest  because they continue to ripen. But ripening soon runs its course, and then fruits  also deteriorate. Eventually fruit and vegetable cells alike run out of energy and  die, their complex biochemical organization and machinery break down, their  enzymes act at random, and the tissue eats itself away.  The spoilage of fruits and vegetables is hastened by microbes, which are always  present on their surfaces and in the air. Bacteria, molds, and yeasts all attack  weakened or damaged plant tissue, break down its cell walls, consume the cell  contents, and leave behind their distinctive and often unpleasant waste products.  Vegetables   are   mainly   attacked   by   bacteria,   which   grow   faster   than   other  microbes. Species of   Erwinia   and   Pseudomonas   cause familiar “soft rot.” Fruits are  more acidic than vegetables, so they’re resistant to many bacteria but more readily  attacked by yeasts and molds ( Penicillium, Botrytis ).  Precut   fruits   and   vegetables   are   convenient   but   especially   susceptible   to  deterioration and spoilage. Cutting has two important effects. The tissue damage  induces   nearby cells   to boost their defensive activity, which   depletes their  remaining nutrients and may cause such changes as toughening, browning, and  the development of bitter and astringent flavors. And it exposes the normally  protected nutrient-rich interior to infection by microbes. So precut produce  requires special care.  Handling Fresh Produce  The aim in storing fruits and vegetables is to slow their inevitable deterioration.  This begins with choosing and handling the produce. Mushrooms as well as some  ripe fruits — berries, apricots, figs, avocados, papayas — have a naturally high  metabolism   and   deteriorate   faster   than   lethargic   apples,   pears,   kiwi   fruits,  cabbages, carrots, and other good keepers. “One rotten apple spoils the barrel”:  moldy fruit or vegetables should be discarded and refrigerator drawers and fruit  bowls should be cleaned regularly to reduce the microbial population. Produce  shouldn’t be subjected to physical stress, whether dropping apples on the floor or
packing tomatoes tightly into a confined space. Even rinsing in water can make  delicate   berries   more   susceptible   to   infection   by   abrading   their   protective  epidermal layer with clinging dirt particles. On the other hand, soil harbors large  numbers of microbes, and should be removed from the surfaces of sturdier fruits  and vegetables before storing them.  The Storage Atmosphere  The storage life of fresh produce is strongly affected by the atmosphere that  surrounds it. All plant tissues are mostly water, and require a humid atmosphere to  avoid drying out, losing turgidity, and damaging their internal systems. Practically,  this means it’s best to keep plant foods in restricted spaces — plastic bags, or  drawers within a refrigerator — to slow down moisture loss to the compartment as  a whole and to the outside. At the same time, living produce exhales carbon  dioxide and water, so moisture can accumulate and condense on the food  surfaces,   which   encourages   microbial   attack.   Lining   the   container   with   an  absorbent material — a paper towel or bag — will delay condensation.  The metabolic activity of the cells can also be slowed by limiting their access to  oxygen. Commercial packers fill their bags of produce with a well-defined mixture  of nitrogen, carbon dioxide, and just enough oxygen (8% or less) to keep the plant  cells functioning normally; and they use bags whose gas permeability matches the  respiration rate of the produce. (Too little oxygen and fruits and vegetables switch  to anaerobic metabolism, which generates alcohol and other odorous molecules  characteristic of fermentation, and causes internal tissue damage and browning.)  Home and restaurant cooks can approximate such a controlled atmosphere by  packing their produce in closed plastic bags with most of the air squeezed out of  them. The plant cells consume oxygen and create carbon dioxide, so the oxygen  levels in the bags slowly decline. However, a major disadvantage of a closed plastic  bag is that it traps the gas ethylene, a plant hormone that advances ripening in  fruits and induces defensive activity and accelerated aging in other tissues. This  means that bagged fruits may pass from ripe to overripe too quickly, and one  damaged   lettuce   leaf   can   speed   the   decline   of   a   whole   head.   Recently,  manufacturers have introduced produce containers with inserts that destroy  ethylene and extend storage life (the inserts contain permanganate).  A very common commercial treatment that slows both water loss and oxygen
uptake   in   whole   fruits   and   fruit-vegetables   —   apples,   oranges,   cucumbers,  tomatoes — is to coat them at the packing facility with a layer of edible wax or oil.  A number of different materials are used, including natural beeswax and carnauba,  candellila, and rice-bran waxes and vegetable oils, and such petrochemical by-  products as paraffin, polyethylene waxes, and mineral oil. These treatments are  harmless, but they can make produce surfaces unpleasantly waxy or hard.  Temperature Control: Refrigeration  The most effective way to prolong the storage life of fresh produce is to control its  temperature. Cooling slows chemical reactions in general, so it slows the metabolic  activity of the plant cells themselves, and the growth of the microbes that attack  them. A reduction of just 10ºF/5ºC can nearly double storage life. However, the  ideal storage temperature is different for different fruits and vegetables. Those  native to temperate climates are best kept at or near the freezing point, and apples  may keep for nearly a year if the storage atmosphere is also controlled. But fruits  and vegetables native to warmer regions are actually injured by temperatures that  low. Their cells begin to malfunction, and uncontrolled enzyme action causes  damage to cell walls, the development of off-flavors, and discoloration. Chilling  injury may become apparent during storage, or only after the produce is brought  back to room temperature. Banana skins turn black in the refrigerator; avocados  darken and fail to soften further; citrus fruits develop spotted skins. Foods of  tropical and subtropical origin keep best at the relatively high temperature of  50ºF/10ºC, and are often better off at room temperature than in the refrigerator.  Among them are melons, eggplants, squash, tomatoes, cucumbers, peppers, and  beans.  Temperature Control: Freezing  The most drastic form of temperature control is freezing, which stops cold the  overall metabolism of fruits, vegetables, and spoilage microbes. It causes most of  the water in the cells to crystallize, thus immobilizing other molecules and  suspending most chemical activity. The microbes are hardy, and most of them  revive on warming. But freezing kills plant tissues, which suffer two kinds of  damage. One is chemical: as the water crystallizes, enzymes and other reactive  molecules become unusually   concentrated   and react abnormally. The other
damage is physical disruption caused by the water crystals, whose edges puncture  cell walls and membranes. When the food is thawed, the cell fluids leak out of the  cells, and the food loses crispness and becomes limp and wet. Producers of frozen  foods minimize the size of the ice crystals, and so the amount of damage done, by  freezing the food as quickly as possible to as low a temperature as possible, often –  40ºF/–40ºC. Under these conditions, many small ice crystals form; at higher  temperatures fewer and larger crystals form, and do more damage. Home and  restaurant freezers are warmer than commercial freezers and their temperatures  fluctuate, so during storage some water melts and refreezes into larger crystals,  and the food’s texture suffers.  Although freezing temperatures generally reduce enzymatic and other chemical  activity, some reactions are actually enhanced by the concentrating effects of ice  formation, including enzymatic breakdown of vitamins and pigments. The solution  to this problem is   blanching.   In this process the food is immersed in rapidly boiling  water for a minute or two, just enough time to inactivate the enzymes, and then  just as rapidly immersed in cold water to stop further cooking and softening of the  cell walls. If vegetables are to be frozen for more than a few days, they should be  blanched first. Fruits are less commonly blanched because their cooked flavor and  texture are less appealing. Enzymatic browning in frozen fruit can be prevented by  packing it in a sugar syrup supplemented with ascorbic acid (between ¼ and ¾  teaspoon per quart, 750–2,250 mg per liter, depending on the fruit’s susceptibility  to browning). Sugar syrup (usually around 40%, or 1.5 lb sugar per quart water, 680  gm per liter) can also improve the texture of frozen fruit by being absorbed into  the cell-wall cement, which becomes stiffer. Frozen produce should be wrapped as  air-   and   watertight   as   possible.   Surfaces   left   exposed   to   the   relatively   dry  atmosphere of the freezer will develop freezer burn, the slow, patchy drying out  caused by the evaporation of frozen water molecules directly into vapor (this is  called “sublimation”). Freezer-burned patches develop a tough texture and stale  flavor.  Cooking Fresh Fruits and Vegetables  Compared to meats, eggs, and dairy products, vegetables and fruits are easy to  cook. Animal tissues and secretions are mainly protein, and proteins are sensitive  molecules; moderate heat (140ºF/60ºC) causes them to cling tightly to each other
and expel water, and they quickly become hard and dry. Vegetables and fruits are  mainly carbohydrates, and carbohydrates are robust molecules; even boiling  temperatures simply disperse them more evenly in the tissue moisture, so the  texture becomes soft and succulent. However, the cooking of vegetables and fruits  does have its fine points. Plant pigments, flavor compounds, and nutrients are  sensitive to heat and to the chemical environment. And even carbohydrates  sometimes behave curiously! The challenge of cooking vegetables and fruits is to  create an appealing texture without compromising color, flavor, and nutrition.  How Heat Affects the Qualities of Fruits and Vegetables  Color   Many plant pigments are altered by cooking, which is why we can often  judge by their color how carefully vegetables have been prepared. The one partial  exception to this rule is the yellow-orange-red carotenoid group, which is more  soluble in fat than in water, so the colors don’t readily leak out of the tissue, and are  fairly stable. However, even carotenoids are changed by cooking. When we heat  carrots, their beta-carotene shifts structure and hue, from red-orange toward the  yellow. Apricots and tomato paste dried in the sun lose much of their intact  carotenoids unless they’re treated with antioxidant sulfur dioxide (p. 291). But  compared to the green chlorophylls and multihued anthocyanins, the carotenoids  are the model of steadfastness.  Aromas from Altered Carotenoid Pigments  Both drying and cooking break some of the pigment molecules in carotenoid-  rich fruits and vegetables into small, volatile fragments that contribute to  their characteristic aromas. These fragments provide notes reminiscent of  black tea, hay, honey, and violets.  Green Chlorophyll   One change in the color of green vegetables as they are  cooked has nothing to do with the pigment itself. That wonderfully intense, bright  green that develops within a few seconds of throwing vegetables into boiling  water is a result of the sudden expansion and escape of gases trapped in the  spaces between cells. Ordinarily, these microscopic air pockets cloud the color of
the chloroplasts. When they collapse, we can see the pigments much more directly.  The Enemy of Green: Acids   Green chlorophyll is susceptible to two chemical  changes during cooking. One is the loss of its long carbon-hydrogen tail, which  leaves the pigment water-soluble — so that it leaks out into the cooking liquid —  and more susceptible to further change. This loss is encouraged by both acid and  alkaline conditions and by an enzyme called chlorophyllase, which is most active  between 150–170ºF/66–77ºC and only destroyed near the boiling point. The  second and more noticeable change in chlorophyll is the dulling of its color, which  is caused when either heat or an enzyme nudge the magnesium atom from the  center of the molecule. The replacement of magnesium by hydrogen is by far the  most common cause of color change in cooked vegetables. In even slightly acidic  water, the plentiful hydrogen ions displace the magnesium, a change that turns  chlorophyll   a   into grayish-green   pheophytin   a,   chlorophyll   b   into yellowish  pheophytin   b.  Changes in chlorophyll during cooking. Left: The normal chlorophyll molecule is bright  green and has a fat-like tail that makes it soluble in fats and oils. Center: Enzymes in  the plant cells can remove the fat-like tail, producing a tailless form that is water-  soluble and readily leaks into cooking liquids. Right: In acid conditions, the central  magnesium atom is replaced by hydrogens, and the resulting chlorophyll molecule is a  dull olive green.  Cooking vegetables without water — stir-frying, for example — will also cause a  color change, because when the temperature of the plant tissue rises above  140ºF/60ºC,   the   organizing   membranes   in   and   around   the   chloroplast   are
damaged, and chlorophyll is exposed to the plant’s own natural acids. Freezing,  pickling, dehydration, and simple aging also damage chloroplasts and chlorophyll.  This is why dull, olive-green vegetables are so common.  Traditional Aids: Soda and Metals   There are two chemical tricks that can help  keep green vegetables bright, and cooks have known about them for hundreds  and even thousands of years. One is to cook them in alkaline water, which has very  few hydrogen ions that are free to displace the magnesium in chlorophyll. The  great 19th-century French chef Antonin Carême de-acidified his cooking water  with wood ash; today baking soda (sodium bicarbonate) is the easiest. The other  chemical trick is to add to the cooking water other metals — copper and zinc —  that can replace magnesium in the chlorophyll molecule, and resist displacement  by hydrogen. However, both tricks have disadvantages. Copper and zinc are  essential trace nutrients, but in doses of more than a few milligrams they can be  toxic. And while there’s nothing toxic about sodium bicarbonate, excessively  alkaline conditions can turn vegetable texture to mush (p. 282), speed the  destruction of vitamins, and leave a soapy off-taste.  Old Tricks for Green Vegetables  Cooks had worked out the practical chemistry of chlorophyll long before it had a  name. The Roman recipe collection of Apicius advises, “ omne holus smaragdinum fit,  si cum nitro coquatur. ”   “All green vegetables will be made emerald colored, if they are  cooked with nitrum.” Nitrum was a natural soda, and alkaline like our baking soda.  In her English cookbook of 1751, Hannah Glasse directed readers to “ Boil all your  Greens in a Copper Sauce-pan by themselves, with a great Quantity of Water. Use no  iron pans, etc., for they are not proper; but let them be Copper, Brass, or Silver. ”  Cookbooks of the early 19th century suggest cooking vegetables and making  cucumber pickles with a copper ha’penny coin thrown in to improve the color. All of  these practices survived in some form until the beginning of the 20th century,  though Sweden outlawed the use of copper cooking pots in its armed services in  the 18th century due to the toxicity of copper in large, cumulative doses. And  “Tabitha Tickletooth” wrote in   The Dinner Question   (1860): “ Never, under any  circumstances, unless you wish entirely to destroy all flavor, and reduce your peas to  pulp, boil them with soda. This favorite atrocity of the English kitchen cannot be too  strongly condemned. ”
Watch the Water, Time, and Sauce   Dulling of the greens can be minimized by  keeping cooking times short, between five and seven minutes, and protecting  chlorophyll from acid conditions. Stir-frying and microwaving can be very quick,  but they expose chlorophyll fully to the cells’ own acids. Ordinary boiling in  copious water has the advantage of diluting the cells’ acids. Most city tap water is  kept slightly alkaline to minimize pipe corrosion, and slightly alkaline water is ideal  for preserving chlorophyll’s color. Check the pH of your water: if it’s acid, its pH  below 7, then experiment with adding small amounts of baking soda (start with a  small pinch per gallon/4 liters) to adjust it to neutral or slightly alkaline. Once the  vegetables are cooked, either serve them immediately or plunge them briefly in  ice water so that they don’t continue to cook and get dull. Don’t dress the  vegetables with acidic ingredients like lemon juice until the last minute, and  consider protecting them first with a thin layer of oil (as in a vinaigrette) or butter.  Red-Purple   Anthocyanins   and   Pale   Anthoxanthins   The   usually   reddish  anthocyanins and their pale yellow cousins, the anthoxanthins, are chlorophyll’s  opposites. They’re naturally water-soluble, so they always bleed into the cooking  water. They too are sensitive to pH and to the presence of metal ions, but acidity is  good for them, metals bad. And where chlorophyll just gets duller or brighter  according to these conditions, the anthocyanins change color completely! This is  why we occasionally see red cabbage turn blue when braised, blueberries turn  green in pancakes and muffins, and garlic turn green or blue when pickled. (The  betacyanins and betaxanthins in beets and chard are different compounds and  somewhat more stable.)  The Enemies: Dilution, Alkalinity, and Metals   Anthocyanins and anthoxanthins  are concentrated in cell vacuoles, and sometimes (as in purple beans and  asparagus) just in a superficial layer of cells. So when the food is cooked and the  vacuoles damaged, the pigments escape and can become so diluted that their  color fades or disappears — especially if they’re cooked in a pot of water. The  pigments that remain are affected by the new chemical environment of the  cooked plant tissue. The vacuoles in which anthocyanins are stored are generally  acid, while the rest of the cell fluids are less so. Cooking water is often somewhat  alkaline,   and   quick   breads   include   distinctly   alkaline   baking   soda.   In   acid  conditions, anthocyanins tend toward the red; around neutral pH, they’re colorless  or light violet; and in alkaline conditions, bluish. And pale anthoxanthins become  more deeply yellow as alkalinity rises. So red fruits and vegetables can fade and
even turn blue when cooked, while pale yellow ones darken. And traces of metals  in the cooking liquid can generate very peculiar colors: some anthocyanins and  anthoxanthins form grayish, green, blue, red, or brown complexes with iron,  aluminum, and tin.  The Aid: Acids   The key to maintaining natural anthocyanin coloration is to keep  fruits and vegetables sufficiently acidic, and avoid supplying trace metals. Lemon  juice in the cooking water or sprinkled on the food can help with both aims: its  citric acid binds up metal ions. Cooking red cabbage with acidic apples or vinegar  keeps it from turning purple; dispersing baking soda evenly in batters, and using  as little as possible to keep the batter slightly acidic, will keep blueberries from  turning green.  Turning Red Wine into White  The sensitivity of anthocyanin pigments to pH is the basis for a remarkable  recipe in the late Roman collection attributed to Apicius:  To make white wine out of red wine. Put bean-meal or three egg whites into  the flask and stir for a very long time. The next day the wine will be white. The  ashes of white grape vines have the same effect.  Both vine ashes and egg whites are alkaline substances and do transform the  wine’s color — though when I’ve tried this with eggs, the result is not so much  a white wine as a gray one.  Creating Color from Tannins   On rare and wonderful occasions, cooking can  actually create anthocyanins: in fact, it transforms touch into color! Colorless  quince slices cooked in a sugar syrup lose their astringency and develop a ruby-like  color and translucency. Quinces and certain varieties of pear are especially rich in  phenolic chemicals, including aggregates (proanthocyanidins) of from 2 to 20  anthocyanin-like subunits. The aggregates are the right size to cross-link and  coagulate proteins, so they feel astringent in our mouth. When these fruits are  cooked for a long time, the combination of heat and acidity causes the subunits to  break off one by one; and then oxygen from the air reacts with the subunits to  form true anthocyanins: so the tannic, pale fruits become more gentle-tasting and
anything from pale pink to deep red. (Interestingly, the similar development of  pinkness in canned pears is considered discoloration. It’s accentuated by tin in  unenameled cans.)  Texture   We’ve seen that the texture of vegetables and fruits is determined by two  factors: the inner water pressure of the tissue’s cells, and the structure of the cell  walls (p. 265). Cooking softens plant tissues by releasing the water pressure and  dismantling   the   cell   walls.   When   the   tissue   reaches   140ºF/60ºC,   the   cell  membranes are damaged, the cells lose water and deflate, and the tissue as a  whole goes from firm and crisp to limp and flabby. (Even vegetables surrounded  by boiling water lose water during cooking, as weighings before and after will  prove.) At this stage, vegetables often squeak against the teeth: they’ve lost the  crunch of turgid tissue, but the cell walls are still strong and resist chewing. Then as  the tissue temperature approaches the boiling point, the cell walls begin to  weaken. The cellulose framework remains mostly unchanged, but the pectin and  hemicellulose “cement” softens, gradually breaks down into shorter chains, and  dissolves. Teeth now easily push adjacent cells apart from each other, and the  texture becomes tender. Prolonged boiling will remove nearly all of the cell-wall  cement and cause the tissue to disintegrate, thus transforming it into a puree.  Acid and Hard Water Maintain Firmness; Salt and Alkalinity Speed Softening   The  wall-dissolving, tenderizing phase of fruit and vegetable cooking is strongly  influenced by the cooking environment. Hemicelluloses are not very soluble in  acid conditions, and readily soluble in alkaline conditions. This means that fruits  and vegetables cooked in an acid liquid — a tomato sauce for example, or other  fruit juices and purees — may remain firm during hours of cooking, while in  neutral boiling water, neither acid nor alkaline, the same vegetables soften in 10 or  15 minutes. In distinctly alkaline water, fruits and vegetables quickly become  mushy. Table salt in neutral cooking water speeds vegetable softening, apparently  because its sodium ions displace the calcium ions that cross-link and anchor the  cement molecules in the fruit and vegetable cell walls, thus breaking the cross-  links and helping to dissolve the hemicelluloses. On the other hand, the dissolved  calcium in hard tap water slows softening by reinforcing the cement cross-links.  When vegetables are cooked without immersion in water — when they’re  steamed or fried or baked — the cell walls are exposed only to the more or less  acid cell fluids (steam itself is also a somewhat acidic pH 6), and a given cooking  time often produces a firmer result than boiling.
The cook can make use of these influences to diagnose the cause of excessively  rapid or slow softening and adjust the preparation — for example, precooking  vegetables in plain water before adding them to a tomato sauce, or compensating  for hard water with a softening pinch of alkaline baking soda. In the case of green  vegetables, shortening the softening time with the help of salt and a discreet dose  of baking soda helps preserve the bright green of the chlorophyll (p. 280).  Starchy Vegetables   Potatoes, sweet potatoes, winter squashes, and other starchy  vegetables owe their distinctive cooked texture to their starch granules. In the raw  vegetables, starch granules are hard, closely packed, microscopic agglomerations  of starch molecules, and give a chalky feeling when chewed out of the cells. They  begin to soften at about the same temperature at which the membrane proteins  denature, the “gelation range,” which in the potato is from 137–150ºF/58–66ºC (it  varies from plant to plant). In this range the starch granules begin to absorb water  molecules, which disrupt their compact structure, and the granules swell up to  many times their original size, forming a soft gel, or sponge-like network of long  chains holding water in the pockets between chains. The overall result is a tender  but somewhat dry texture, because the tissue moisture has been soaked up into  the starch. (Think of the textural difference between cooked high-starch potatoes  and low-starch carrots.)  Cooking starchy vegetables. Left: Before cooking, the plant cells are intact, the starch  granules compact and hard. Right: Cooking causes the starch granules to absorb water  from the cell fluids, swell, and soften.  In starchy vegetables with relatively weak cell walls, the gel-filled cells may be  cohesive enough to pull away from each other as separate little particles, giving a
mealy impression. This water absorption and the large surface area of separate  cells are the reasons that mashed potatoes and other cooked starchy purees  benefit from and accommodate large amounts of lubricating fat.  Precooking Can Give a Persistent Firmness to Some Vegetables and Fruits   It  turns out that in certain vegetables and fruits — including potatoes, sweet  potatoes, beets, carrots, beans, cauliflower, tomatoes, cherries, apples — the usual  softening during cooking can be reduced by a low-temperature precooking step. If  preheated to 130–140ºF/55–60ºC for 20–30 minutes, these foods develop a  persistent firmness that survives prolonged final cooking. This can be valuable for  vegetables meant to hold their shape in a long-cooked meat dish, or potatoes in a  potato salad, or for foods to be preserved by canning. It’s also valuable for boiled  whole potatoes and beets, whose outer regions are inevitably over-softened and  may begin to disintegrate while the centers cook through. These and other long-  cooked root vegetables are usually started in cold water, so that the outer regions  will firm up during the slow temperature rise. Firm-able vegetables and fruits have  an enzyme in their cell walls that becomes activated at around 120ºF/50ºC (and  inactivated above 160ºF/70ºC), and alters the cell-wall pectins so that they’re more  easily cross-linked by calcium ions. At the same time, calcium ions are being  released as the cell contents leak through damaged membranes, and they cross-  link the pectin so that it will be much more resistant to removal or breakdown at  boiling temperatures.  Persistently Crisp Vegetables   A few underground stem vegetables are notable for  retaining some crunchiness after prolonged cooking and even canning. These  include the Chinese water chestnut, lotus root, bamboo shoots, and beets. Their  textural robustness comes from particular phenolic compounds in their cell walls  (ferulic acids) that form bonds with the cell-wall carbohydrates and prevent them  from being dissolved away during cooking.  Flavor   The relatively mild flavor of most vegetables and fruits is intensified by  cooking. Heating makes taste molecules — sweet sugars, sour acids — more  prominent by breaking down cell walls and making it easier for the cell contents to  escape and reach our taste buds. Carrots, for example, taste far sweeter when  cooked. Heat also makes the food’s aromatic molecules more volatile and so more  noticeable, and it creates new molecules by causing increased enzyme activity,  mixing of cell contents, and general chemical reactivity. The more prolonged or  intense the heating, the more the food’s original aroma molecules are modified
and supplemented, and so the more complex and “cooked” the flavor. If the  cooking temperature exceeds the boiling point — in frying and baking, for  example   —   then   these   carbohydrate-rich   materials   will   begin   to   undergo  browning reactions, which produce characteristic roasted and caramelized flavors.  Cooks can create several layers of flavor in a dish by combining well-cooked, lightly  cooked, and even raw batches of the same vegetables or herbs.  One sensory quality unique to plants is astringency (p. 271), and it can make such  foods as artichokes, unripe fruits, and nuts less than entirely pleasant to eat. There  are ways to control the influence of tannins in these foods. Acids and salt increase  the perception of astringency, while sugar reduces it. Adding milk, gelatin, or other  proteins to a dish will reduce its astringency by inducing the tannins to bind to  food proteins before they can affect salivary proteins. Ingredients rich in pectin or  gums will also take some tannins out of circulation, and fats and oils will slow the  initial binding of tannins and proteins.  Nutritional Value   Cooking destroys some of the nutrients in food, but makes  many nutrients more easily absorbed. It’s a good idea to include both raw and  cooked fruits and vegetables in our daily diet.  Some Diminishment of Nutritional Value…   Cooking   generally   reduces   the  nutritional content of fruits and vegetables. There are some important exceptions  to this rule, but the levels of most vitamins, antioxidants, and other beneficial  substances are diminished by the combination of high temperatures, uncontrolled  enzyme activity, and exposure to oxygen and to light. They and minerals can also  be drawn out of plant tissues by cooking water. These losses can be minimized by  rapid and brief cooking. Baked potatoes, for example, heat up relatively slowly and  lose much more vitamin C to enzyme action than do boiled potatoes. However,  some techniques that speed cooking — cutting vegetables into small pieces, and  boiling in a large volume of water, which maintains its temperature — can result in  increased leaching of water-soluble nutrients, including minerals and the B and C  vitamins. To maximize the retention of vitamins and minerals, cook small batches  of vegetables and fruits in the microwave oven, in a minimal amount of added  water.  …And Some Enhancement   Cooking has several general nutritional benefits. It  eliminates potentially harmful microbes. By softening and concentrating foods, it  also makes them easier to eat in significant quantities. And it actually improves the
availability of some nutrients. Two of the most important are starch and the  carotenoid pigments. Starch consists of long chains of sugar molecules crammed  into masses called granules. Our digestive enzymes can’t penetrate past the outer  layer of raw starch granules, but cooking unpacks the starch chains and lets our  enzymes break them down. Then there are beta-carotene, the precursor to vitamin  A, its chemical relative lycopene, an important antioxidant, and other valuable  carotenoid pigments. Because they’re not very soluble in water, we simply don’t  extract these chemicals very efficiently by just chewing and swallowing. Cooking  disrupts the plant tissues more thoroughly and allows us to extract much more of  them.   (Added   fat   also   significantly   improves   our   absorption   of   fat-soluble  nutrients.)  There are many different ways of cooking vegetables and fruits. What follows is a  brief outline of the most common methods and their general effects. They can be  divided into three groups: moist methods that transfer heat by means of water; dry  methods that transfer heat by means of air, oil, or infrared radiation; and a more  miscellaneous group that includes ways of restructuring the food, either turning it  into a fluid version of itself, or extracting the essence of its flavor or color.  Hot Water: Boiling, Steaming, Pressure-Cooking  Boiling and steaming are the simplest methods for cooking vegetables, because  they require no judgment of cooking temperature: whether water is boiling on a  high flame or low, its temperature is 212ºF/100ºC (near sea level, with predictably  lower temperatures at higher elevations). And because hot water and steam are  excellent carriers of heat, these are efficient methods as well, ideal for the rapid  cooking of green vegetables that minimizes their loss of color (p. 280). One  important difference is that hot water dissolves and extracts some pectin and  calcium from cell walls, while steaming leaves them in place: so boiling will soften  vegetables faster and more thoroughly.  Boiling   In the case of boiling green vegetables, it’s good to know the pH and  dissolved mineral content of your cooking water. Ideally it should be neutral or just  slightly alkaline (pH 7–8), and not too hard, because acidity dulls chlorophyll, and  acidity and calcium both slow softening and so prolong the cooking. A large  volume of rapidly boiling water will maintain a boil even after the cold vegetables  are added, cut into pieces small enough to cook through in about five minutes.
Salt in the cooking water at about the concentration of seawater (3%, or 2  tablespoons/30 gm per quart/liter) will speed softening (p. 282) and also minimize  the loss of cell contents to the water (cooking water without its own dissolved salt  will draw salts and sugars from the plant cells). When just tender enough, the  vegetables should be removed and either served immediately or scooped briefly  into ice water to stop the cooking and prevent further dulling of the color.  Starchy vegetables, especially potatoes cooked whole or in large pieces, benefit  from a different treatment. Their vulnerability is a tendency for the outer portions  to soften excessively and fall apart while the interiors cook through. Hard and  slightly acid water can help them maintain their surface firmness, as will starting  them in cold water and raising the temperature only gradually to reinforce their  cell walls (p. 283). Salt is best omitted from the water, since it encourages early  softening of the vulnerable exterior. Nor is it necessarily best to cook them at the  boiling point: 180–190ºF/80–85ºC is sufficient to soften starch and cell walls and  won’t overcook the exterior as badly, though the cooking through will take longer.  When vegetables are included in a meat braise or stew and are expected to have a  tender integrity, their cooking needs as much attention as the meat’s. A very low  cooking temperature that keeps the meat tender may leave the vegetables hard,  while repeated bouts of simmering to dissolve a tough cut’s connective tissue may  turn them to mush. The vegetables can be precooked separately, either to soften  them for a low-temperature braise or firm them for long simmering; or they can be  removed from a long-simmered dish when they reach the desired texture and  added back when the meat is done.  Steaming   Steaming is a good method for cooking vegetables at the boiling point,  but without the necessity of heating a whole pot of water, exposing the food  directly to turbulent water, and leaching out flavor or color or nutrients. It doesn’t  allow the cook to control saltiness, calcium cross-linking, or acidity (steam itself is a  slightly acid pH 6, and plant cells and vacuoles are also more acid than is ideal for  chlorophyll); and evenness of cooking requires that the pieces be arranged in a  single layer, or that the pile be very loose to allow the steam access to all food  surfaces. Steaming leaves the food tasting exclusively of its cooked self, though the  steam can also be aromatized by the inclusion of herbs and spices.  Pressure Cooking   Pressure cooking is sometimes applied to vegetables, especially  in the canning of low-acid foods. It is essentially cooking by a combination of
boiling water and steam, except that both are at about 250ºF/120ºC rather than  212ºF/100ºC. (Enclosing the water in an airtight container traps the water vapor,  which in turn raises the boiling point of the water.) Pressure cooking heats foods  very rapidly, which means that it’s also very easy to overcook fresh vegetables. It’s  best to follow specialized recipes closely.  Hot Air, Oil, and Radiation: Baking, Frying, and Grilling  These “dry” cooking methods remove moisture from the food surface, thus  concentrating and intensifying flavor, and can heat it above the boiling point, to  temperatures   that   generate   the typical   flavors   and   colors   of   the   browning  reactions (p. 777).  Baking   The hot air in an oven cooks vegetables and fruits relatively slowly, for  several reasons. First, air is not as dense a medium as water or oil, so air molecules  collide with the food less often, and take longer to impart energy to it. Second, a  cool object in a hot oven develops a stagnant “boundary layer” of air molecules  and water vapor that slows the collision rate even further. (A convection fan  speeds cooking by circulating the air more rapidly and disrupting the boundary  layer.) Third, in a dry atmosphere the food’s moisture evaporates from the surface,  and this evaporation absorbs most of the incoming energy, only a fraction of  which gets to the center. So baking is much less efficient than boiling or frying.  Of course, the oven’s thin medium is why the oven is a good means for drying  foods, either partly — for example, to concentrate the flavor of watery tomatoes —  or almost fully, to preserve and create a chewy or crisp texture. And once the  surface has dried and its temperature rises close to the oven’s, then carbohydrates  and proteins can undergo the browning reactions, which generate hundreds of  new taste and aroma molecules and so a greater depth of flavor.  Often vegetables are coated with oil before baking, and this simple pretreatment  has two important consequences. The thin surface layer of oil doesn’t evaporate  the way the food moisture does, so all the heat the oil absorbs from the oven air  goes to raising its and the food’s temperature. The surface therefore gets hotter  than it would without the oil, and the food is significantly quicker both to brown  and to cook through. Second, some of the oil molecules participate in the surface  browning reactions and change the balance of reaction products that are formed;  they create a distinctly richer flavor.
Frying and Sautéing   Baking oiled vegetables is sometimes called “oven frying,”  and indeed true frying in oil also desiccates the food surface, browns it, and  enriches the flavor with the characteristic notes contributed by the oil itself. A food  may be fried partly or fully immersed in oil, or just well lubricated with it (sautéing);  and typical oil temperatures range from 325–375ºF/160–190ºC. True frying is faster  than oven frying because oil is much denser than air, so energetic oil molecules  collide with the food much more frequently. The key to successful frying is getting  the piece size and frying temperature right, so that the pieces cook through in the  time that the surfaces require to be properly browned. Starchy vegetables are the  most commonly fried plant foods, and I describe the important example of  potatoes in detail in chapter 6 (p. 303). Many more delicate vegetables and even  fruits are fried with a protective surface coating of batter (p. 553) or breading,  which browns and crisps while the food inside is insulated from direct contact with  the high heat.  Stir-Frying and Sweating   Two important variations on frying exploit opposite  ends of the temperature scale. One is high-temperature stir-frying. The vegetables  are cut into pieces sufficiently small that they heat through in about a minute, and  they’re cooked on a smoking-hot metal surface with just enough oil to lubricate  them, and with constant stirring to ensure even heating and prevent burning. In  stir-frying it’s important to preheat the pan alone and add the oil just a few  seconds before the vegetables; otherwise the high heat will damage the oil and  make it unpalatable, viscous, and sticky. The rapidity of stir-frying makes it a good  method for retaining pigments and nutrients. At the other extreme is a technique  sometimes called “sweating” (Italian   soffrito   or Catalan   soffregit,   both meaning  “underfrying”): the very slow cooking over low heat of finely chopped vegetables  coated with oil, to develop a flavor base for a dish featuring other ingredients.  Often the cook wants to avoid browning, or to minimize it; here the low heat and  oil function to soften the vegetables, develop and concentrate their flavors, and  blend those flavors together. Vegetables cooked in a version of the   confit   (p. 177)  are immersed in oil and slowly cooked to soften them and infuse them with the  oil’s flavor and richness.  Grilling   Grilling and broiling cook by means of the intense infrared radiation  emitted from burning coals, flames, and glowing electrical elements. This radiation  can desiccate, brown, and burn in rapid succession, so it’s important to adjust the  distance between heat source and food to make sure that the food can heat
through before the surface chars. As in baking, a coating of oil speeds the cooking  and improves flavor. Enclosing the food in a wrapper — fresh corn in its husk,  plantains in their skin, potatoes in aluminum foil — can give some protection to  the surface and essentially steam the food in its own moisture, while allowing in  some of the smoky aroma from the heat source and smoldering wrapper. And  some foods actually benefit from charring. Large sweet and hot chillis have a thick,  tough cuticle or “skin” that is tedious to peel away. Because it’s relatively dry  compared to the underlying flesh, and made up in part of flammable waxes, it can  be burned to a crisp before the flesh gets soft. Once burned, the skin can be  scraped or rinsed off with ease. Similarly, the flesh of eggplants is smokily  perfumed and easily scraped from the skin when the whole vegetable is grilled  until the flesh softens and the skin dries and toughens.  Microwave Cooking  Microwave radiation selectively energizes the water molecules in fruits and  vegetables, and the water molecules then heat up the cell wall, starch, and other  plant molecules (p. 786). Because radiation penetrates into food an inch/2 cm or  so, it can be a fairly rapid method, and is an excellent one for retaining vitamins  and minerals. However, it has several quirks that the cook must anticipate and  compensate for. Because the microwaves penetrate a limited distance into the  food, they will cook evenly only if the food is cut into similar-sized thin pieces, and  the pieces arranged in a single layer or very loose pile. Energetic water molecules  turn into water vapor and escape from the food: so microwaves tend to dry foods  out. Vegetables should be enclosed in an almost steam-tight container, and often  benefit from starting out with a small amount of added water so that their surfaces  don’t lose too much moisture and shrivel. And because the foods must be  enclosed, they retain some volatile chemicals that would otherwise escape — so  their flavor can seem strong and odd. The inclusion of other aromatics can help  mask this effect.  Cooks can exploit the drying quality of microwave radiation to crisp thin slices of  fruits and vegetables. This is best done at a low power setting so that the heating is  gentle and even, and doesn’t rapidly progress to browning or burning. When  there’s little water left in a patch of tissue, it takes more energy to break it free, so  the local boiling point rises to a temperature high enough to break apart  carbohydrates and proteins, and this causes browning and then blackening.
Pulverizing and Extracting  In addition to preparing fruits and vegetables more or less as is, with their tissue  structure intact, cooks often deconstruct them completely. In some preparations,  we blend the contents of the plant cells with the walls that normally separate and  contain them. In others, we separate the food’s flavor or color from its flavorless,  colorless cell-wall fibers or abundant water, and produce a concentrated extract of  that food’s essence.  Purees   The simplest deconstructed version of fruits and vegetables is the puree,  which includes such preparations as tomato and apple sauces, mashed potatoes,  carrot soup, and guacamole. We make purees by applying enough physical force to  crush the tissue, break apart and break open its cells, and mix cell innards with  fragments of the cells’ walls. Thanks to the high water content of the cells, most  purees are fluid versions of the original tissue. And thanks to the thickening  powers of the cell-wall carbohydrates, which bind up water molecules and get  entangled with each other, they also have a considerable, velvety body — or can  develop such a body when we boil off excess water and concentrate the  carbohydrates. (Potatoes and other starchy vegetables are a major exception:  starch granules in the cells absorb all the free moisture in the tissue, and are best  left intact in unbroken cells so the solid puree doesn’t become gluey. See the  discussion of mashed potatoes on p. 303.) Purees are made into sauces and soups,  frozen into ices, and dried into “leathers.” For purees as sauces, see p. 620.  Many ripe fruits have sufficiently weakened cell walls that they are easily pureed  raw, while most vegetables are first cooked to soften the cell walls. Precooking has  the additional   advantage of inactivating cell enzymes which, when   cellular  organization is disrupted, would otherwise destroy vitamins and pigments, alter  flavor, and cause unsightly browning (p. 269). The size of solid particles in the  puree, and so its textural fineness, is determined by how thoroughly ripening or  cooking have dismantled the cell walls, and by the method used to crush the  tissue. Mashing by hand leaves large cell aggregates intact; the screens in food  mills and strainers produce smaller pieces; machine-powered food processor  blades chop very finely, and blender blades, working in a more confined space,  chop and shear more finely still. Persistent cellulose-rich fibers can be removed  only by passing the puree through a strainer.  Juices   Juices are refined versions of the puree: they are mainly the fluid contents of
fruit and vegetable cells, made by crushing the raw food and separating off most  of the solid cell-wall materials. Some of these materials inevitably end up in the  juice — for example, the pulp in orange juice — and can cause both desirable and  undesirable haziness and body. Because juicing mixes together the contents of  living cells, including active enzymes and various reactive and oxygen-sensitive  substances, fresh juices are unstable and change rapidly. Apple and pear juices  turn brown, for example, thanks to the action of browning enzymes and oxygen (p.  269). If not used immediately, they’re best kept chilled or frozen, perhaps after a  heat treatment just short of the boil to inactivate enzymes and kill microbes.  Modern juicing machines can apply very strong forces, and make it possible to  extract juice from any fruit or vegetable, not just the traditional ones.  Foams and Emulsions   The cell-wall carbohydrates in purees and juices can be  used to stabilize two otherwise fleeting physical structures, a foam of air bubbles  and an emulsion of oil droplets (pp. 638, 625), which are especially easy to prepare  with modern electrical blenders and mixers. If a puree or juice is whipped to fill it  with air bubbles, the cell-wall carbohydrates slow the flow of water out of the  bubble walls, so the bubbles take longer to collapse. This allows the cook to make  a foam or mousse that lasts long enough to be savored; foams from juice are  especially ethereal. Similarly, when oil is whisked into a puree or juice, the plant  carbohydrates insulate the oil droplets from each other, and the oil and water  phases separate more slowly. The cook can therefore incorporate oil into a puree or  juice to form a temporary emulsion, with richer dimensions of flavor and texture  than the puree alone. The thicker the puree, the more stable and less delicate the  foam or emulsion. The consistency of a thick preparation can be lightened by  adding liquid (water, juice, stock).  Frozen Purees and Juices: Ices, Sorbets, Sherbets   When purees and juices are  frozen, they form a refreshing semisolid mass that’s known by a variety of names,  including ice, sorbet, granita, and sherbet. This kind of preparation was first refined  in 17th-century Italy, which gave us the term   sorbet   (via   sorbetto   from the Arabic  sharab,   or “syrup”). Its flavor is essentially that of the fruit (sometimes an herb,  spice, flower, coffee, or tea), usually heightened with added sugar and acid (to 25–  35% and 0.5% respectively), and with an overall sugar-acid ratio similar to that of  the melons (30–60:1; see p. 382). The puree or juice is often diluted with some  water as well, sometimes to reduce the acidity (lemon and lime juices), sometimes  to stretch an ingredient in short supply, and sometimes to improve the flavor,
which is interestingly affected by the very cold serving temperature: for example,  undiluted melon can taste too much like its close relative the cucumber, and  thinned pear puree tastes less like frozen fruit, more delicate and perfumed. In the  United States, “sherbet” is the term applied to fruit ices with milk solids included  (3–5%) to fill out the flavor and help soften the texture.  Though traditional ices are made with fruits, vegetable ices can be refreshing too,  as a cool mouthful and as a surprise.  The Texture of Frozen Purees and Juices   Ice texture can vary from rocky to coarse  to creamy, depending on the proportions of ingredients, how the ice is made, and  the temperature at which it’s served. During the freezing process, water in the mix  solidifies into millions of tiny ice crystals, which are surrounded by all the other  substances in the mix: mainly leftover liquid water that forms a syrup with  dissolved sugars, both from the fruit and added by the cook, as well as contents of  the plant cells and cell walls. The more syrup and plant debris there are, the more  the solid crystals are lubricated, the more easily they slide past each other when  we press with spoon or tongue, and the softer the ice’s texture. Most ices are made  with about double the sugar of ice cream (whose substantial fat and protein  content helps soften the texture, p. 40), between 25 and 35% by weight. Sweet  fruits require less added sugar to reach this proportion, and purees rich in pectins  and other plant debris (pineapple, raspberry) require less total sugar for softening.  Many cooks replace a quarter to a third of the added table sugar (sucrose) with  corn syrup or glucose, which helps soften without adding as much perceptible  sweetness. The size of the ice crystals, and so the ice’s coarseness or creaminess, is  determined by the content of sugar and plant solids, and by agitation during  freezing. Sugar and solids encourage the formation of many small crystals rather  than a few large ones, and so do stirring and churning (p. 44). Ices served right  from the freezer are relatively hard and crystalline; allowing them to warm and  thus partly melt produces a softer, smoother consistency.  Vegetable Stocks   A vegetable stock is a water extract of several vegetables and  herbs that can serve as a flavorful base for soups, sauces, and other preparations.  By simmering the vegetables until soft, the cook breaks down their cell walls and  releases the cell contents into the water. These contents include salts, sugars, acids,  and savory amino acids, as well as aromatic molecules. Carrots, celery, and onions  are almost always included for their aromatics, and mushrooms and tomatoes are  the richest source of savory amino acids. The vegetables are finely chopped to
maximize   their   surface   area   for   extraction.   Precooking   some   or   all   of   the  vegetables in a small amount of fat or oil has two advantages: it adds new flavors,  and the fat it contributes is a better solvent than water for many aromatic  molecules. It’s important not to dilute the extracted flavors in too much water;  good proportions by weight (volume varies by piece size) are 1 part vegetables to  1.5 or 2 parts water. The vegetables and water are simmered uncovered (to allow  evaporation and concentration) for no more than an hour, after which it’s generally  agreed that the stock flavor ceases to improve and even deteriorates. Once the  vegetables are strained out, the stock can be concentrated by boiling it down.  Flavored Oils, Vinegars, Syrups, Alcohols   Cooks extract the characteristic aroma  chemicals of fruits and vegetables, herbs and spices, into a variety of liquids that  then serve as convenient ready-made flavorings for sauces, dressings, and other  preparations. In general, the freshest-tasting extracts come from slowly steeping  intact raw fruits or herbs at room or refrigerator temperature for days or weeks. The  flavors of dried herbs and spices are less altered by heat, and can be extracted  more rapidly in hot liquids.  The growth of microbes that cause spoilage or illness is inhibited by the acidity of  vinegar, the concentrated sugar in syrups, and the alcohol in vodka (whose own  neutral flavor makes it a good medium for flavor extraction), so flavored vinegars,  syrups, and alcohols are relatively trouble-free preparations. However, flavored oils  require special care. The air-free environment within the oil can encourage the  growth of botulism bacteria, which live in the soil, are found on most field-grown  foods,   and   have   spores   that   survive   ordinary   cooking   temperatures.   Cold  temperatures inhibit their growth. Uncooked oils flavored with garlic or herbs are  safest when made in the refrigerator, and both uncooked and cooked flavored oils  should be stored in the refrigerator.  “Chlorophyll”   A somewhat arcane but fascinating vegetable extract is culinary  chlorophyll, an intensely green coloring agent that is not identical to biochemical  chlorophyll, but is certainly a concentrated source of it. Culinary chlorophyll is  made by finely grinding dark green leaf vegetables to isolate and break open cells;  soaking them in water to dilute pigment-damaging enzymes and acids, and  separate off solid fibers and cell-wall debris; gently simmering the water to  inactivate enzymes and cause the cells and free chloroplasts to rise to the surface;  and straining off and draining the green mass. Though the chemical chlorophyll in  culinary chlorophyll will still turn drab when heated in an acid food, it can be
added at the last minute to acid and other sauces and maintain its vibrant green  through the meal.  Preserving Fruits and Vegetables  Fruits and vegetables can be preserved indefinitely by killing the living tissue and  thus   inactivating   its   enzymes,   and   then   making   it   either   inhospitable   or  unavailable to microbes. Some of these techniques are ancient, some a product of  the industrial age.  Drying and Freeze-Drying  Drying   Drying preserves foods by reducing the tissue’s water content from around  90% to between 5 and 35%, a range in which very little can grow on it. This is one  of the oldest preservative techniques; the sun, fire, and mounds of hot sand have  been used to dry foods since prehistory. Fruits and vegetables usually benefit from  treatments to inactivate the enzymes that cause vitamin and color damage.  Commercially dried vegetables are usually blanched; and fruits are dipped or  sprayed with a number of sulfur compounds that prevent oxidation and thereby  enzymatic browning and the loss of antioxidant phenolic compounds, vitamins,  and flavor. While sun-drying used to be the most common treatment for prunes,  raisins, apricots, and figs, forced hot air-drying is now widely used because it is  more predictable. Home and restaurant cooks can use the oven or small electric  driers whose temperature is easier to control. Fruits and vegetables are dried at  relatively low temperatures, 130–160ºF/55–70ºC, to minimize the loss of flavor and  color and prevent the surface from drying too fast and impeding moisture loss  from within. Pureed fruits are spread out into thin sheets to make “fruit leather.”  Relatively moist dried fruits and vegetables are nicely soft, but they’re also  vulnerable to some hardy yeasts and molds, and therefore are best stored in the  refrigerator.  Freeze-Drying   Freeze-drying is a controlled version of freezer burn: it removes  moisture not by evaporation but by sublimation, the transformation of ice directly  into water vapor. Although we think of freeze-drying as a recent industrial  innovation, the natives of Peru have been freeze-drying potatoes in the Andes for  millennia. To make   chuño,   which can be stored indefinitely, they trample potatoes  to break down their structure and expose them constantly to the dry, cold
mountain air, so that they freeze at night and lose some moisture by sublimation,  then thaw during the day and lose more water by evaporation.   Chuño   develops a  strong flavor from the disruption of the potato tissues and long exposure to the air  and sun, and is reconstituted in water to make stews.  In modern industrial freeze-drying, foods are quickly chilled to as low as –70ºF/–  57ºC, then slightly warmed and subjected to a vacuum, which pulls their water  molecules out and dries them. Because the foods aren’t heated or exposed to  oxygen, their flavor and color remain relatively fresh. Many fruits and vegetables  are freeze-dried today and used as is for snack foods, or reconstituted with water in  instant soup mixes, emergency rations, and camping foods.  Fermentation and Pickling: Sauerkraut and Kimchi, Cucumber  Pickles, Olives  Fermentation is one of the oldest and simplest means of preserving foods. It  requires no particular kind of climate, no cooking, and so no expenditure of fuel:  just a container, which can be a mere hole in the ground, and perhaps some salt or  seawater. Olives and sauerkraut — fermented cabbage — are familiar examples of  fermented fruits and vegetables. An overlapping category is the   pickle,   a food  preserved by immersion in brine or a strong acid such as vinegar. Brines often  encourage fermentation, and fermentation generates preservative acids, so the  term “pickle” is applied to both fermented and unfermented preparations of  cucumbers and other foods. Less familiar but intriguing relatives of sauerkraut and  olives include North African preserved lemons, the pickled plums, radishes, and  other vegetables of Japan, and the highly spiced, multifarious pickled fruits and  vegetables of India.  The Nature of Fermentation   Preserving fruits and vegetables by fermentation is  based on the fact that plants are the natural home of certain benign microbes  which in the right conditions — primarily the absence of air — will flourish and  suppress the growth of other microbes that cause spoilage and disease. They  accomplish this suppression by being the first to consume the plant material’s  readily   metabolized   sugars,   and   by   producing   a   variety   of   antimicrobial  substances, including lactic and other acids, carbon dioxide, and alcohol. At the  same time, they leave most of the plant material intact, including its vitamin C  (protected from oxidation by the carbon dioxide they generate); they often add
significant amounts of B vitamins; and they generate new volatile substances that  enrich the food’s aroma. These benign “lactic acid bacteria” apparently evolved  eons ago in oxygen-poor piles of decaying vegetation, and now transform our  carefully gathered harvests into dozens of different foods across the globe (see  box, p. 308), as well as turning milk into yogurt and cheese and chopped meat into  tangy sausages (pp. 44 and 176).  Fermentation Conditions and Results   While some fruits and vegetables are  fermented alone in tightly covered pits or jars, most are either dry-salted or brined  to help draw water, sugars, and other nutrients out of the plant tissues, and to  provide   a   liquid   to   cover   the   food   and   limit   its   exposure   to   oxygen. The  characteristics   of   the   pickle   depend   on   the   salt   concentration   and   the  fermentation temperature, which determine which microbes dominate and the  substances   they   produce.   Low   salt   concentrations   and   temperatures   favor  Leuconostoc mesenteroides,   which generates a mild but complex mixture of acids,  alcohol,   and   aroma   compounds;   higher   temperatures   favor   Lactobacillus  plantarum,   which produces lactic acid almost exclusively. Many pickles undergo a  microbial succession, with   Leuconostoc   dominating early and then giving way to  Lactobacillus   as the acidity rises. Some Asian pickles are made not by spontaneous  lactic fermentations, but by the addition of another fermented “starter” material,  the by-products of producing wine or miso or soy sauce. Japanese   nukazuke   are  unique in employing rice bran, whose abundant B vitamins end up enriching the  pickled daikon and other vegetables.  Problems   Problems   in   vegetable   fermentations   are   generally   caused   by  inadequate or excessive salt concentrations or temperatures, or exposure to the air,  all conditions that favor the growth of undesirable microbes. In particular, if the  vegetables are not weighted down to keep them below the brine surface, or if the  brine surface is itself not tightly covered, a film of yeasts, molds, and air-requiring  bacteria will form, lower the brine acidity by consuming its lactic acid, and  encourage the growth of spoilage microbes. The results may include discoloration,  softening, and rotten smells from the breakdown of fats and proteins. Even the  helpful   Lactobacillus plantarum   can generate an undesirably harsh acidity if the  fermentation is too vigorous or prolonged.
Some Fermented Vegetables and Fruits  Method   Material   Microbes   Region   Example  Bury in leaf-  lined pit  Banana   Lactic acid  bacteria  Africa   Kocho  Breadfruit, root  vegetables  South  Pacific  Poi (taro)  Enclose in in  jars  Mustard and  related greens  Lactic acid  bacteria  Nepal   Gundruk  Radish roots   Nepal,  India  Sinki  Salt, 1-2%   Cabbage   Lactic acid  bacteria  Europe   Sauerkraut  Salt, 2-3%   Carrots (purple)  grated in water  Lactic acid  bacteria  Pakistan,  North India  Kanji  Salt, 3-4%   Cabbage, radish  bacteria  Lactic acid   Asia   Kimchi  Salt, 4-10%  (sometimes  with rice bran)  Radish,  cabbage,  eggplant,  cucumbers  Lactic acid  bacteria,  yeasts  Europe,  Asia  Tsukemono  (nukazuke)  Salt, 5-8%   Cucumbers   Lactic add  bacteria  Europe,  Asia  Pickles  Salt, 5-10%   Lemons   Yeasts   West Asia,  North  Africa  Lamoun  makboos,  preserved  lemons  Salt, 6-10%   Olives   Lactic acid  bacteria,  yeasts  Europe   Olives  Salt, 20%   Lemons, limes,  unripe mangoes  Bacteria,  yeasts  India   Achats, pickles  Adapted from G. Campbell Platt, fermented Foods of the World—A  Dictionary and Guide (London: Buttewrworth, 1987).
Unfermented, Directly Acidified Pickles   There are also a host of fruit and  vegetable products that are pickled not by fermentation, but by the direct addition  of acid in the form of wine or vinegar, which inhibits the growth of spoilage  microbes. This ancient technique is much faster than fermentation and allows  greater control over texture and salt content, but it produces a simpler flavor.  Today, the usual method is to add enough hot vinegar to produce a final acetic  acid concentration of around 2.5% (half that of standard vinegar) in such materials  as   beans,   carrots,   okra,   pumpkin,   mushrooms,   watermelon   rind,   pears,   and  peaches.   Nonfermented   pickles   are   usually   heat-treated   (185ºF/85ºC   for   30  minutes) to prevent spoilage. The simple flavor of directly acidified pickles is often  augmented by the addition of spices and/or sugar.  Pickle Texture   Most pickled fruits and vegetables are eaten raw as a condiment,  and are preferred crisp. The use of unrefined sea salt improves crispness thanks to  its calcium and magnesium impurities, which help cross-link and reinforce cell-wall  pectins. Especially crisp cucumber and watermelon-rind pickles are made by  adding alum (aluminum hydroxide), whose aluminum ions cross-link cell-wall  pectins, or by presoaking the raw materials in a solution of “pickling lime,” or  calcium hydroxide, whose calcium ions do the same. (Lime is strongly alkaline and  its   excess   must   be   washed   from   the   ingredients   before   pickling   to   avoid  neutralizing the pickles’ acidity.) When subsequently cooked, pickles may not  soften because their acidity stabilizes cell walls (p. 282). Tender pickles are  produced by precooking the vegetable until soft.  Fermented Cabbage: Sauerkraut and Kimchi   Two popular styles of cabbage  pickles illustrate the kind of distinctiveness that can be achieved with slight  variations in the fermentation process. European sauerkraut is a refreshing side  dish for rich meats, and Korean kimchi is a strong accompaniment to bland rice.  Sauerkraut — the word is German for “sour cabbage” — is made by fermenting  finely shredded head cabbage with a small amount of salt at a cool room  temperature; it’s allowed to become quite tart and develops a remarkable, almost  flowery aroma thanks to some yeast growth. Kimchi is made by fermenting intact  stems and leaves of Chinese cabbage together with hot peppers and garlic, and  sometimes other vegetables, fruits (apple, pear, melon), and fish sauce. More salt is  used, and the fermentation temperature is significantly lower, a reflection of its  original production in pots partly buried in the cold earth of late autumn and  winter. The result is a crunchy, pungent pickle that is noticeably less acid but saltier
than sauerkraut, and may even be fizzy due to the dominance of gas-producing  bacteria below about 58ºF/14ºC.  Fermented Cabbage Two Ways  The German and Korean versions of fermented cabbage are made differently  and develop distinctive qualities.  Sauerkraut   Kimchi  Piece size   1 mm shreds   Small leaves and stems  Ingredients other than cabbage  and salt  None   Chillis, garlic, fish sauce  Fermentation temperature   64–76ºF/18–  24ºC  41–57ºF/5–14ºC  Fermentation time   1–6 weeks   1–3 weeks  Final salt content   1–2%   3%  Final acidity   1–1.5%   0.4–0.8%  Qualities   Tart, aromatic   Strong flavor, crunchy,  tingly  Cucumber Pickles   Today there are three different styles of cucumber pickle in the  United States, and the two most common are really flavored cucumbers; they don’t  keep unless refrigerated. True fermented cucumbers have become relatively hard  to find.  All cucumber pickles start with thin-skinned varieties that are harvested while  immature so that the seed region hasn’t yet begun to liquefy, and cleaned of  flower   remnants   that   harbor   microbes   with   enzymes   that   cause   softening.  Fermented cucumbers are cured in a 5–8% brine at 64–68ºF/18–20ºC for two to  three weeks, and accumulate 2–3% salt and 1–1.5% lactic acid: so they’re relatively  strong. Such pickles are sometimes moderated before bottling by soaking out  some salt and lactic acid, and adding acetic acid. The most common style of  cucumber pickle, crisper and more gentle in flavor, is made by soaking the
cucumbers briefly in vinegar and salt until they reach 0.5% acetic acid and 0–3%  salt, and then   pasteurizing them   before bottling. Such   pickles need to be  refrigerated   after   opening.   Finally,   there   are   the   freshest-tasting   but   very  perishable pickles, which are soaked in vinegar and salt but not pasteurized. They  are kept refrigerated from the moment they’re packaged.  Common problems in home-pickled cucumbers include cheesy and rancid off-  flavors, which come from the growth of undesirable bacteria when there’s not  enough salt or acidity to inhibit them, and hollow “bloaters,” which are pickles  swollen with carbon dioxide produced by yeasts (or sometimes by   Lactobacillus  brevis   or   mesentericus ) when the salt level is too high.  Olives   Fresh olives are practically inedible thanks to their ample endowment of a  bitter phenolic substance,   oleuropein,   and its relatives. The olive tree was first  cultivated in the eastern Mediterranean around 5,000 years ago, probably as a  source of oil. Olive fermentation may have been discovered when early peoples  learned to remove the bitterness by soaking the fruit in changes of water. By  Roman times, the soaking water was often supplemented with alkaline wood  ashes, which cut the debittering period from weeks to hours. (The modern  industrial treatment is a 1–3% solution of sodium hydroxide, or lye.) Alkaline  conditions actually break bitter oleuropein down, and also breach the waxy outer  cuticle and dissolve cell-wall materials. These effects make the fruit as a whole  more permeable to the salt brine that follows (after a wash and acid treatment to  neutralize the alkalinity), and help the fermentation proceed faster. Lactic acid  bacteria are the main fermenters, though some yeasts also grow and contribute to  the aroma. Olives may be debittered and fermented while still green (“Spanish”  style, the major commercial type) or once their skin has turned dark with purplish  anthocyanins, when they are less bitter.  Olives are also fermented without any preliminary leaching or alkaline treatment,  but this results in a different kind of fermentation. Nutrients for the microbes in the  brine diffuse very slowly from the flesh through the waxy cuticle, and the intact  phenolic materials inhibit microbial growth. So the temperature is kept low (55–  64ºF/13–18ºC), and yeasts rather than lactic acid bacteria dominate in a slow  alcoholic fermentation that takes as long as a year. This method is usually applied  to black ripe olives (Greek, Italian Gaeta, French Niçoise). They turn out more bitter  and less tart than the pretreated kinds (an acidity of 0.3–0.5% rather than 1%), and  have a distinctively winey, fruity aroma.
Unfermented “ripe black olives” are an invention of the California canning industry.  They’re made from unripe green olives, which may undergo an incidental and  partial fermentation while being stored in brine before processing. But their  unique character is determined by repeated brief lye treatments to leach out and  break down oleuropein, and the addition of an iron solution and dissolved oxygen  to react with phenolic compounds and turn the skin black. Olives so treated are  then packed in a light 3% brine, canned, and sterilized. They have a bland, cooked  flavor and often some residual alkalinity, which gives them a slippery quality.  Unusual Fermentations: Poi, Citron, Preserved Lemons   Poi is a Hawaiian  preparation of taro root (p. 306). The starchy taro is cooked, mashed, thinned with  water, and then allowed to stand for one to three days. Lactic acid bacteria sour it,  and produce some volatile acids as well (vinegary acetic, cheesy propionic). In  longer fermentations, yeasts and   Geotrichum   molds also grow and contribute fruity  and mushroomy notes.  Citron peel, candied from a relative of the lemon, owes its traditionally complex  flavor to fermentation. Originally the citron fruits were preserved for some weeks  in seawater or a 5 to 10% brine while they were shipped from Asia and the Middle  East to Europe; now they’re brined to develop flavor. Yeasts grow on the peel and  produce alcohol, which then supports acetic acid bacteria. The result is the  production of volatile esters that deepen the aroma of the peel. The preserved  lemons of Morocco and other north African countries have a similar character;  they’re made by packing cut lemons with salt and fermenting for days to weeks.  Sugar Preserves  Another venerable technique for preserving fruits is to boost their sugar content.  Like salt, sugar makes the fruit inhospitable to microbes: it dissolves, binds up  water molecules, and draws moisture out of living cells, thus crippling them. Sugar  molecules are quite heavy compared to the sodium and chloride ions in salt, so it  takes a larger mass of sugar to do the same job of preserving. The usual proportion  by weight of added sugar to fruit is about 55 to 45, with sugar accounting for  nearly two-thirds of the final cooked mixture. Of course sugar preserves are very  sweet, and this is a large part of their appeal. But they also develop an intriguing  consistency otherwise found only in meat jellies — a firm yet moist solidity that  can range from stiff and chewy to quiveringly tender. And they can delight the eye
with a crystalline clarity: in the 16th century, Nostradamus described a quince jelly  whose color “is so diaphanous that it resembles an oriental ruby.”   These remarkable  qualities arise from the nature of pectin, one of the components of the plant cell  wall, and its fortuitous interaction with the fruit’s acids and the cook’s added sugar.  The Evolution of Sugar Preserves   The earliest sugar preserves were probably  fruit pieces immersed in syrupy honey (the Greek term for quinces packed in  honey,   melimelon,   gave us the word   marmalade ) or in the boiled-down juice of  wine grapes. The first step toward jams and jellies was the discovery that when  they were cooked together, sugar and fruit developed a texture that neither could  achieve on its own. In the 4th century   CE , Palladius gave directions for cooking  down shredded quince in honey until its volume was reduced by half, which would  have made a stiff, opaque paste similar to today’s “fruit cheese” (spreadable “fruit  butter” is less reduced). By the 7th century there were recipes for what were  probably clear and delicate jellies made by boiling the juice of quince with honey.  A second important innovation was the introduction from Asia of cane sugar,  which unlike honey is nearly pure sugar, with no moisture that needs boiling off,  and no strong flavor that competes with the flavor of the fruit. The Arab world was  using cane sugar by the Middle Ages, and brought it to Europe in the 13th century,  where it soon became the preferred sweetener for fruit preserves. However, jams  and jellies didn’t become common fare until the 19th century, when sugar had  become cheap enough to use in large quantities.  Pectin Gels   Fruit preserves are a kind of physical structure called a   gel:   a mixture of  water and other molecules that is solid because the other molecules bond  together into a continuous, sponge-like network that traps the water in many  separate little pockets. The key to creating a fruit gel is pectin, long chains of  several hundred sugar-like subunits, which seems to have been designed to help  form a highly concentrated, organized gel in plant cell walls (p. 265). When fruit is  cut up and heated near the boil, the pectin chains are shaken loose from the cell  walls and dissolve into the released cell fluids and any added water. They can’t  simply re-form their gel for a couple of reasons. Pectin molecules in water  accumulate a negative electrical charge, so they repel each other rather than bond  to each other; and they’re now so diluted by water molecules that even if they did  bond, they couldn’t form a continuous network. They need help to find each other  again.  The cook does three things to cooked fruit to bring pectin molecules back
together into a continuous gel. First, he adds a large dose of sugar, whose  molecules attract water molecules to themselves, thus pulling the water away from  the pectin chains and leaving them more exposed to each other. Second, he boils  the mixture of fruit and sugar to evaporate some of the water away and bring the  pectin   chains   even   closer   together.   Finally,   he   increases   the   acidity,   which  neutralizes the electrical charge and allows the aloof pectin chains to bond to each  other into a gel. Food scientists have found that the optimal conditions for pectin  gelation are a pH between 2.8 and 3.5 — about the acidity of orange juice, and  0.5% acid by weight — a pectin concentration of 0.5 to 1.0%, and a sugar  concentration of 60 to 65%.  Two kinds of pectin gels. Left: In ordinary fruit preserves, the cook causes pectin  molecules to bond directly to each other and form a continuous meshwork by  carefully adjusting acidity and sugar content. Right: A modified form of pectin (low  methoxy) can be bonded into a continuous meshwork by means of added calcium  ions (the black dots), no matter what the sugar content. This is how low-sugar  preserves are made.  Preparing Preserves   Preserve making begins with cooking the fruit to extract its  pectin. Quince, apples, and citrus fruits are especially rich in pectin and often  included to supplement other pectin-poor fruits, including most berries. The  combination of heat and acid will eventually break pectin chains into pieces too  small to form a network, so this preliminary cooking should be as brief and gentle  as possible. (If a sparkling, clear jelly is desired, then the cooked fruit is gently  strained   to   remove   all   solid   particles   of   cell   debris.) Then   sugar   is   added,  supplemental pectin if necessary, and the mixture rapidly brought to the boil to  remove water and concentrate the other ingredients. The boiling is continued until
the temperature of the mix reaches 217–221ºF/103–105ºC (at sea level; 2ºF/1ºC  lower   for   every   500   ft/165   m   elevation),   which   indicates   that   the   sugar  concentration has reached 65% (for the relationship between sugar content and  boiling point, see p. 680). A fresher flavor results when this cooking is done at a  gentle simmer in a wide pot with a large surface area for evaporation. (Industrial  manufacturers cook the water out under a vacuum at much lower temperatures,  100–140ºF/38–60ºC, to maintain as much fresh flavor and color as possible.) Now  supplemental acid is added (late in the process, to avoid breaking down the pectin  chains), and the readiness of the mix is tested by placing a drop on a cold spoon or  saucer to see whether it gels. Finally, the mix is poured into sterilized jars. The mix  sets as it cools below about 180ºF/80ºC, but firms most rapidly at 86ºF/30ºC and  continues to get firmer for some days or weeks.  The usual problem with preserve making is failure of the mix to set even at the  proper boiling temperature and sugar concentration. This can be caused by three  different factors: inadequate amounts of either acid or good-quality pectin, or  prolonged cooking that damages the pectin. Failures can sometimes be rescued  by the addition of a commercial liquid pectin preparation and/or cream of tartar or  lemon juice, and a brief reboiling. Too much acid can cause weeping of fluid from  an overfirm gel.  Uncooked and Unsweetened “Preserves”   Modern preserve making has been  transformed by the availability of concentrated pectin, extracted and purified from  citrus and apple wastes, which can be added to any crushed fruit, cooked or not, to  guarantee a firm gel. “Freezer jams” are made by loading up crushed fresh fruit with  supplemental pectin and sugar, letting them sit for a day while the pectin  molecules slowly form their network and form the gel, and then “preserving” them  in the refrigerator or freezer (the uncooked fruit would otherwise soon be spoiled  by sugar-tolerant molds and yeasts). Pectin is also used to make clear jelly candies  and other confections.  Food chemists have developed several different versions of pectin for special  commercial applications. The most notable of these is a pectin that sets without  the need for any added sugar to pull water molecules away from the long pectin  chains; instead, the chains bond to each other strongly by means of cross-linking  calcium, which is added after the fruit and pectin mixture has been cooked. This  pectin is what makes it possible to produce low-calorie “preserves” with artificial  sweeteners.
Candied   Fruits   Candied   fruits   are   small   whole   fruits   or   pieces   that   are  impregnated with a saturated sugar syrup, then drained, dried, and stored at room  temperature as separate pieces. Fruit cooked in a sugar syrup remains relatively  firm and maintains its shape thanks to the interaction of sugar molecules with the  cell-wall hemicelluloses and pectins. Candying can be a tedious process because it  takes time for sugar to diffuse from the syrup evenly into the fruit. Typically the  fruit is gently cooked to soften it and make its tissues more permeable, then  soaked for several days at room temperature in a syrup that starts out at 15–20%  sugar, and is made more concentrated each day until it reaches 70–74%.  Canning  Canning was a cause for wonder when it was invented by Nicolas Appert around  1810: contemporaries said that it preserved fruits and vegetables almost as if fresh!  True, it preserves them without the desiccated texture of drying, the salt and  sourness of fermentation, or the sweetness of sugar preserves; but there’s no  mistaking that canned foods have been cooked. Canning is essentially the heating  of food that has been   isolated in hermetically sealed containers. The heat  deactivates plant enzymes and destroys harmful microbes, and the tight seal  prevents recontamination by microbes in the environment. The food can then be  stored at room temperature without spoiling.  The arch villain of the canning process is the bacterium   Clostridium botulinum,  which thrives in low-acid, airless conditions — oxygen is toxic to it — and  produces a deadly nerve toxin. The botulism toxin is easily destroyed by boiling,  but the dormant bacterial spores are very hardy and can survive prolonged  boiling. Unless they are killed by the extreme condition of higher-than-boiling  temperatures (which require a pressure cooker), the spores will proliferate into  active bacteria when the can cools down, and the toxin will accumulate. One  precautionary measure is to boil any canned produce after opening to destroy any  toxin that may be there. But all suspect cans, especially those bulging from the  pressure of gases produced by bacterial growth, should be discarded.  The low pH (high acidity) of tomatoes and many common fruits inhibits the  growth of botulism bacteria, so these foods require the least severe canning  treatment, usually about 30 minutes in a bath of boiling water to heat the contents  to 185–195ºF/85–90ºC. Most vegetables, however, are only slightly acid, with a pH
of 5 or 6, and are much more vulnerable to bacteria and molds. They’re typically  heated in a pressure cooker at 240ºF/116ºC for 30 to 90 minutes.  Object 5
A Survey of Common Vegetables  Chapter 5 described the general nature of plant foods and their behavior in the  kitchen. This chapter and the next two survey some familiar vegetables, fruits, and  flavorings. Because we eat hundreds of different plants, and countless varieties of  them, these surveys can only be selective and sketchy. They’re meant to highlight  the distinctive qualities of these foods, to help the food lover appreciate those  qualities more fully and make the best use of them.  These chapters give special attention to two features of our plant foods. One is  family relationships,   which tell us which plants are related to each other, and  conversely how varied a given species can be. Such information helps us make  sense of similarities and differences among particular foods, and may suggest  ideas for interesting combinations and themes.  The second feature emphasized in the following pages is   flavor chemistry.   Fruits  and vegetables, herbs and spices are the most complex foods we eat. If we know  even a little bit about which substances create their flavor, then we become more  attuned to how the flavor is built, and better able to perceive echoes and  harmonies among different ingredients. Such perceptions enrich the experience of  eating, and can help us become better cooks. All aromas come from particular  volatile chemicals, and I sometimes name those chemicals to be as specific as  possible about the qualities of a given food. The names may look foreign and  incomprehensible, but they’re simply names — and sometimes make more sense  than the names of the foods they’re in!  This survey of vegetables begins underground, with the plant parts that sustain  much of the earth’s population. It then moves up the plant, from stem to leaf to  flower and fruit, and finishes with water plants and those delicious nonplants, the  mushrooms.  Roots and Tubers  Potatoes, sweet potatoes, yams, cassava — these roots and tubers are staple foods  for billions of people. They are subterranean organs in which plants store starch,
large molecular aggregates of the sugars they create during photosynthesis. They  are therefore a concentrated and long-lived package of nourishment for us as well.  Some anthropologists theorize that roots and tubers may have helped fuel human  evolution, when the climate of the African savanna cooled about 2 million years  ago and fruits became scarce. Because tubers were plentiful and far more  nutritious when cooked — raw starch granules resist our digestive enzymes, while  gelated starch does not — they may have offered a significant advantage to early  humans who learned to dig for them and roast them in the embers of a fire.  Though some underground vegetables are a third or more starch by weight, many  others — carrots, turnips, beets — contain little or no starch. Because starch  granules absorb moisture from their cells as they cook, starchy vegetables tend to  have a dry, mealy texture, while nonstarchy vegetables remain moist and cohesive.  Food Words:   Root, Radish, Tuber, Truffle  Our word   root   comes from an Indo-European word that meant both “root”  and “branch.”   Radish   and   licorice   share that same ancestor.   Tuber   comes from  an Indo-European (linguistic) root meaning “to swell,” as many plant storage  organs do. The same root gave us   truffle,   the swollen underground fungus, as  well as   thigh, thumb, tumor,   and   thousand.  Potatoes  There are more than 200 species of potato, relatives of the tomato, chilli, and  tobacco that are indigenous to moist, cool regions of Central and South America.  Some were cultivated 8,000 years ago. Spanish explorers brought one species,  Solanum tuberosum,   from Peru or Colombia to Europe around 1570. Because it was  hardy and easy to grow, the potato was inexpensive and the poor were its principal  consumers. (An Irish peasant ate 5–10 pounds per day at the time of the 1845  blight.) It now leads all other vegetables in worldwide production. More potatoes  are consumed in the United States than any other vegetable, around a third of a  pound/150 gm per person per day.  The potato is a tuber, the tip of an underground stem that swells with stored starch
and water and bears primordial buds, the “eyes,” that generate the stem and roots  of a new plant. It is sometimes a little sweet, with a slight but characteristic  bitterness, and has a mild earthy flavor from a compound (a pyrazine) produced by  soil microbes, but also apparently within the tuber itself.  Harvest and Storage   True “new” potatoes are immature tubers, harvested from  green vines during the late spring and throughout the summer. They are moist and  sweet, relatively low in starch, and perishable. Mature potatoes are harvested in  the fall. The vines are killed by cutting or drying, and the tubers are left in the soil  for several weeks to “cure” and toughen their skin. Potatoes can be stored in the  dark   for   months,   during   which   their   flavor   intensifies;   slow   enzyme   action  generates fatty, fruity, and flowery notes from cell-membrane lipids. The ideal  storage temperature is 45–50ºF/7–10ºC. At warmer temperatures they may sprout  or decay, and at colder temperatures their metabolism shifts in a complicated way  that results in the breakdown of some starch to sugars. Makers of potato chips  must “recondition” cold-stored potatoes at room temperature for several weeks to  reduce their levels of glucose and fructose, which otherwise cause the chips to  brown too rapidly and develop a bitter taste. Internal black spots in potatoes are  essentially bruises, formed when an impact during handling damages cells and  causes the browning enzymes to create dark complexes of the amino acid tyrosine  (alkaloid formation and therefore bitterness often rise also).  Nutritional Qualities   Potatoes are a good source of energy and vitamin C. Yellow-  fleshed varieties owe their color to fat-soluble carotenoids (lutein, zeaxanthin),  purple and blue ones to water-soluble and antioxidant anthocyanins. Potatoes are  notable for containing significant levels of the toxic alkaloids solanine and  chaconine, a hint of whose bitterness is part of their true flavor. Most commercial  varieties contain 2 to 15 milligrams of solanine and chaconine per quarter-pound  (100 grams) of potato. Progressively higher levels result in a distinctly bitter taste, a  burning sensation in the throat, digestive and neurological problems, and even  death. Stressful growing conditions and exposure to light can double or triple the  normal levels. Because light also induces chlorophyll formation, a green cast to the  surface is a sign of abnormally high alkaloid levels. Greened potatoes should either  be peeled deeply or discarded, and strongly bitter potatoes should not be eaten.  Cooking Types and Behavior   There are two general cooking categories of potato,  called the “mealy” and the “waxy” for their textures when cooked. Mealy types  (russets, blue and purple varieties, Russian and banana fingerlings) concentrate
more dry starch in their cells, so they’re denser than waxy types. When cooked, the  cells tend to swell and separate from each other, producing a fine, dry, fluffy  texture that works well in fried potatoes and in baked and mashed potatoes, which  are moistened with butter or cream. In waxy types (true new potatoes and  common U.S. red-and white-skinned varieties), neighboring cells cohere even  when cooked, which gives them a solid, dense, moist texture, and holds them  together in intact pieces for gratins, potato cakes, and salads. Both types can be  made firmer and more coherent, less prone to the “sloughing” of outer layers when  boiled, by treating them to the low-temperature precooking that strengthens cell  walls (p. 283).  Cooked   potatoes   sometimes   develop   a   large   internal   region   of   bluish-gray  discoloration. This “after-cooking darkening” is caused by the combination of iron  ions, a phenolic substance (chlorogenic acid), and oxygen, which react to form a  pigmented complex. This problem can be minimized in boiled potatoes by making  the pH of the water distinctly acidic with cream of tartar or lemon juice after the  potatoes are half-cooked.  The flavor of boiled potatoes is dominated by the intensified earthy and fatty,  fruity, and flowery notes of the raw tuber. Baked potatoes develop another layer of  flavor from the browning reactions (p.777), including malty and “sweet” aromas  (methylbutanal, methional). Leftover potatoes often suffer from a stale, cardboard-  like flavor that develops over several days in the refrigerator, but within a few  hours if the potatoes are kept hot for prolonged service. It turns out that the  aromatic fragments of membrane lipids are temporarily stabilized by the tuber’s  antioxidant vitamin C; but with time the vitamin C is used up and the fragments  become oxidized to a series of less pleasant aldehydes.  Potatoes are prepared in many ways, and used as an ingredient in many dishes.  Here are brief notes on a few starring roles.  Mashed and Pureed Potatoes   There   are   many   different   styles   of   mashed  potatoes, but all of them involve cooking the potatoes whole or in pieces, crushing  them to a more or less fine particle size, and lubricating and enriching the particles  with a combination of water and fat, usually in the form of butter and milk or  cream. Some luxurious versions may be almost as much butter as potato, or  include eggs or egg yolks. Mealy types fall apart into individual cells and small  aggregates, so they offer a large surface area for coating by the added ingredients,  and readily produce a fine, creamy consistency. Waxy potatoes require more
mashing to obtain a smooth texture, exude more gelated starch, and don’t absorb  enrichment as easily. The classic French   pommes purées,   pureed potatoes, are made  from waxy potatoes, pieces of which are pushed through a fine sieve or food mill  and then worked hard — to the point of having what an eminent French cookbook  writer, Mme Ste-Ange, called a “dead arm” — first alone and then with butter, to  incorporate air and obtain the lightness of whipped cream. American recipes take  a more gentle approach, sieving mealy varieties and carefully stirring in liquid and  fat to avoid excessive cell damage, starch release, and glueyness.  Fried Potatoes   Fried potatoes are some of the world’s favorite foods. Deep-fried  potato sticks and slices and the technique of double-frying were all well known in  Europe by the middle of the 19th century, and in England were attributed mainly  to the French: hence the term “French fry” for what the French simply call fried  potatoes ( pommes frites ). These products happily turned out to be among the few  foods whose quality need not be compromised by mass production. Of course  they’re rich: the frying oil in which they’re immersed coats their surface and is  drawn into the tiny pores created when the surfac dries out. The proportion of oil  to potato depends on the surface area. Chips, which are almost all surface, average  about 35% oil, while thick fries are more like 10–15%.  French Fries   “French fries” may first have been made in significant quantities by  Parisian street vendors early in the 19th century. They are potato sticks cut with a  square cross section, 5–10 mm on a side, deep-fried in oil, with a crisp gold exterior  and a moist interior that’s fluffy if the potatoes are high-starch russets, creamy  otherwise. Simple quick frying doesn’t work very well; it gives a thin, delicate crust  that’s quickly softened by the interior’s moisture. A crisp crust requires an initial  period of gentle frying, so that starch in the surface cells has time to dissolve from  the granules and reinforce and glue together the outer cell walls into a thicker,  more robust layer. Good fries can be made by starting the potato strips in relatively  cool oil, 250–325ºF/120–163ºC, cooking for 8–10 minutes, then raising the oil  temperature to 350–375ºF/175–190ºC and cooking for 3–4 minutes to brown and  crisp the outside. The most efficient production method is to pre-fry all the potato  strips at the lower temperature ahead of time, set them aside at room temperature,  and then do the brief high-temperature frying at the last minute.  Potato Chips   Potato chips are essentially french fries that are all crust and no  interior. The potatoes are cut into thin cross sections around 1.5 mm thick, the  equivalent of just 10–12 potato cells, then deep-fried until dry and crisp. There are
two basic ways of frying chips, and they produce two different textures. Cooking at  a fairly constant and high oil temperature, around 350ºF/175ºC, heats the slices so  rapidly that the starch granules and cell walls have little chance to absorb any  moisture before they’re desiccated and done, in 3–4 minutes. The texture is  therefore delicately crisp and fine-grained. Most packaged chips have this texture  because they’re made in a continuous processor whose oil temperature stays high.  On the other hand, cooking at an initially low and slowly increasing temperature,  beginning around 250ºF/120ºC and reaching 350ºF/175ºC in 8–10 minutes, gives  the starch granules time to absorb water, exude dissolved starch into the potato  cell walls, and reinforce and glue them together. The result is a much harder,  crunchier chip. This is the texture created by “kettle frying,” or cooking the slices by  the batch in a vessel like an ordinary pot. The temperature of the preheated kettle  drops immediately when a batch of cold potatoes is dumped in, so the potatoes  cook in oil whose temperature starts low and rises slowly as the potatoes’ moisture  is cooked out and the heater catches up.  Soufflée Potatoes   Soufflée potatoes are a kind of hybrid French fry-chip in which  the potato slices puff up into delicate brown balloons. They are made by cutting  potato slices around 3 mm (   in) thick, and deep-frying them at a moderate ⅛  temperature, 350ºF/175ºC, until their surfaces become leathery and just begin to  brown. The slices are cooled, then fried a second time at a high temperature,  around 380ºF/195ºC. Now when the interior moisture is heated to the boil and  vaporized, the stiffened surfaces resist the pressure, and the vapor pushes the two  surfaces apart, leaving a hollow center.  Sweet Potatoes  The sweet potato is the true storage root of   Ipomoea batatas,   a member of the  morning glory family. It is native to northern South America, and may have  reached Polynesia in prehistoric times. Columbus brought the sweet potato to  Europe, and by the end of the 15th century it was established in China and the  Philippines. China now produces and consumes far more sweet potatoes than the  Americas, enough to make it the second most important vegetable worldwide.  There are many different varieties, ranging from dry and starchy varieties common  in tropical regions, some pale and others red or purple with anthocyanins, to the  moist, sweet version, dark orange with beta-carotene, that is popular in the United  States and was confusingly named a “yam” in 1930s marketing campaigns (for true
yams, see p. 306). The bulk of the U.S. crop is grown in the Southeast and cured for  several   days   at   86ºF/30ºC   to   heal   damaged   skin   and   encourage   sugar  development. True to their subtropical heritage, sweet potatoes store best at 55–  60ºF/ 13–16ºC. Chilling injury can contribute to “hardcore,” a condition in which the  root center remains hard even when cooked.  Most sweet potato varieties sweeten during cooking thanks to the action of an  enzyme that attacks starch and breaks it down to maltose, a sugar made up of two  glucose molecules that’s about a third as sweet as table sugar. Moist or “soggy”  varieties convert as much as 75% of their starch to maltose, so they seem  permeated with syrup! The enzyme starts to make maltose when the tightly  packed   starch   granules   absorb   moisture   and   expand,   beginning   around  135ºF/57ºC, and it stops when the rising heat denatures it, at around 170ºF/75ºC.  Slow baking therefore gives the enzyme a longer time to work than does rapid  cooking in steam, boiling water, or a microwave, and produces a sweeter result.  Freshly harvested “green” roots available in the autumn have less enzyme activity  and so don’t become as sweet or moist.  Pale and red-purple sweet potatoes have a delicate, nutty aroma, while orange  types   have   the   heavier,   pumpkin-like   quality   created   by   fragments   of   the  carotenoid pigments. Some varieties (e.g., red-skinned Garnet) suffer from after-  cooking darkening (p. 303) due to their abundant phenolic compounds.  Food Words:   Potato, Yam  Potato   came into English via the Spanish   patata,   a version of the word used by  the Taino peoples of the Caribbean for the sweet potato,   batata.   The Peruvian  Quechua word for the true potato of the Andes was   papa. Yam   comes via  Portuguese from a West African word meaning “to eat.”  Tropical Roots and Tubers  Root and tuber vegetables that come from the tropics generally contain less water  than common potatoes, and as much as double the starch (potatoes are 18%  carbohydrate by weight, cassavas 36%). They therefore become very floury when
baked, dense and waxy when boiled or steamed, and help thicken soups and  stews in which they’re included. They have a relatively short storage life and suffer  chilling damage if refrigerated, but can be frozen after preliminary peeling and  cutting.  Cassava, Manioc, and Yuca   These are all names for the elongated root of a  tropical plant in the spurge family,   Manihot esculenta,   which has the very useful  habit of lasting in the ground for as much as three years. It was domesticated in  northern South America, and has spread through the lowland tropics of Africa and  Asia in the last century or so. It’s often made into flatbreads or fermented as well as  cooked on its own. There are two general groups of cassava varieties: potentially  toxic “bitter” varieties that are used in the producing countries, and safer “sweet”  varieties that are exported and found in our ethnic markets. Bitter varieties, which  are highly productive crop plants, have defensive cells that generate bitter cyanide  throughout   the   root,   and   must   be   thoroughly   treated   —   for   example,   by  shredding, pressing, and washing — to become safe and palatable. They’re mainly  processed in the producing countries into flour and tapioca, small balls of dried  cassava starch that become pleasantly jelly-like when remoistened in desserts and  drinks. Sweet cassava varieties are less productive crop plants, but have cyanide  defenses only near their surface, and are safe to eat after peeling and normal  cooking. The root flesh is snow-white and dense, with a bark-like skin and a fibrous  core usually removed before cooking. Cassava benefits from cooking in water to  moisten the starch before being fried or baked.  Taro and Dasheen   Taro and dasheen are two of many names for tubers of a water-  loving plant native to eastern Asia and the Pacific islands,   Colocasia esculenta,  which is in the arum family (as are calla lilies and philodendrons). Like other arums,  taro contains protective crystalline needles of calcium oxalate (40–160 mg per 100  gm), and deposits them near stores of protein-digesting enzymes. The result is an  arsenal of something resembling poison-tipped darts: when the tuber is eaten raw,  the crystals puncture the skin and then the enzymes eat away at the wound,  producing considerable irritation. Cooking overcomes this defensive system by  denaturing the enzymes and dissolving the crystals.  Taro is commonly found in two sizes, one the main tuberous growth which may be  several pounds, the other smaller side-growths, each a few ounces, and with a  moister texture. The flesh is mottled by vessels purplish with phenolic compounds;  during cooking the phenolics and color diffuse into and tinge the cream-colored
flesh. Taro retains its shape when simmered, and it becomes waxy on cooling. It  has a pronounced aroma that reminds some of chestnuts, others of egg yolk. In  Hawaii taro is boiled, mashed, and fermented into poi, one element in the luau (p.  295).  Taro is sometimes confused with malanga, yautia, and cocoyam, tubers of a  number of New World tropical species in the genus   Xanthosoma,   which are also  arums protected by oxalate crystals. Malanga grows in drier soils than taro, is more  elongated, has an earthier flavor, and more readily falls apart when simmered in  soups and stews.  Yam   True yams are starchy tubers of tropical plants that are related to the grasses  and lilies, a dozen or so cultivated species of   Dioscorea   from Africa, South America,  and the Pacific with varying sizes, textures, colors, and flavors. They are seldom  seen in mainstream American markets, where “yam” means a sugary orange sweet  potato (p. 304). True yams can grow to 100 lb/50 kg and more, and in the Pacific  islands have been honored with their own little houses. They appear to have been  cultivated as early as 8000   BCE   in Asia. Many yams contain oxalate crystals just  under the skin, as well as soap-like saponins, which give a slippery, frothy quality to  their juices. Some varieties contain a toxic alkaloid called dioscorine that must be  removed by grating and leaching in water. Yam tubers help their plants survive  drought, and they have a longer pantry life than cassava or taro.  The Carrot Family: Carrots, Parsnips, and Others  Root vegetables in the carrot family share the family habit of containing distinctive  aromatic molecules, so they’re often used to lend complexity to stocks, stews,  soups, and other preparations. Carrots and parsnips contain less starch than  potatoes and are notably sweet; they may be 5% sugars, a mixture of sucrose,  glucose, and fructose. Carrots have found their way into cakes and sugar preserves  in the West, are shredded and sweetened for rice dishes in Iran, and in India are  cooked down in milk to make a vegetable kind of fudge (halwa).  Carrot   Cultivated carrots are swollen taproots of the species   Daucus carota,   which  arose in the Mediterranean region. There are two main groups of cultivated carrots.  The eastern anthocyanin carrot developed in central Asia, and has reddish-purple  to purple-black outer layers and a yellow core of conducting vessels. It’s eaten in its  home region and can also be found in Spain. The Western carotene carrot appears
to be a hybrid among three different groups of ancestors: yellow carrots cultivated  in Europe and the Mediterranean since medieval times; white carrots that had  been cultivated since classical times; and some wild carrot populations. The  familiar orange carrot, the richest vegetable source of the vitamin A precursor  beta-carotene, appears to have been developed in Holland in the 17th century.  There are also Asian carrot varieties whose roots are red with lycopene, the tomato  carotenoid. Carotene carrots have the practical advantage of retaining their oil-  soluble pigments in water-based dishes, while anthocyanin carrots bleed their  water-soluble colors into soups and stews.  The distinctive aroma of carrots is due largely to terpenes (p. 273), and is a  composite of pine, wood, oil, citrus, and turpentine notes; cooking adds a violet-  like note from fragmented carotene. White varieties tend to be the most strongly  aromatic. Exposure to sunlight, high temperatures, or physical damage can cause  the roots to generate alcohol, which adds to the solvent-like aroma, as well as a  bitter defensive chemical. Peeling the thin outer layer removes most of the  bitterness as well as phenolic compounds that cause brown discoloration. The  sweetness is most noticeable when the roots are cooked, which weakens the  strong cell walls and frees the sugars to be tasted. The carrot core carries water  from the root to the leaves and has less flavor than the outer storage layers.  Pre-peeled “baby” carrots, actually cut from mature ones, often have a harmless  white fuzz on their surface due to damaged outer cell layers that dehydrate within  hours of processing.  Parsnip   Pastinaca sativa,   along with its aromatic taproot, is native to Eurasia, was  known to the Greeks and Romans, and like the turnip was an important staple food  before the introduction of the potato. The version known to us today was  developed in the Middle Ages. The parsnip accumulates more starch than the  carrot, but converts it to sugars when exposed to cold temperatures; so winter  roots are sweeter than autumn roots, and before sugar became cheap were used  to make cakes and jams in Britain. Its pale, somewhat dry tissue softens faster  during cooking than either the potato’s or carrot’s.  Parsley Root   Parsley root is the taproot of a particular variety of parsley,  Petroselinum crispum   var.   tuberosum,   is also flavored by a mixture of terpenoids,  and is more complex and pungent than parsley leaves. Parsley is a Eurasian native  (p. 408).
Arracacha   Arracacha is the root of a South American member of the carrot family,  Arracacia xanthorhiza.   It has smooth roots of various colors, and a rich flavor that  the eminent plant explorer David Fairchild called much superior to carrots.  The Lettuce Family: Sunchoke, Salsify, Scorzonera, Burdock  Roots and tubers from northerly members of the lettuce family share three  characteristics: an abundance of fructose-based carbohydrates, little starch, and a  mild flavor reminiscent of the true artichoke (also a lettuce relative). The fructose  carbohydrates (small-chain fructosans and starch-like inulin) provide both an  energy store and an antifreeze mechanism for the overwintering plants. Humans  don’t have the enzymes necessary to digest fructose chains, so beneficial bacteria  in our intestines feed on them instead, in the process generating carbon dioxide  and other gases that can cause abdominal discomfort if we’ve eaten a large  portion of these vegetables.  The sunchoke is the nonfibrous, plump tuber of a North American sunflower  ( Helianthus   tuberosus ),   whose   traditional   and   obscure   name   is   “Jerusalem  artichoke.” It’s pleasantly moist, crunchy, and sweet when raw, and becomes soft  and sweet after brief cooking. When cooked for 12–24 hours at a low temperature,  around 200ºF/93ºC, sunchoke carbohydrates are largely converted to digestible  fructose, and the flesh becomes sweet and translucently brown, like a vegetable  aspic.  Salsify ( Tragopogon porrifolius ), sometimes called “oyster plant” for the supposed  flavor resemblance, and black salsify or scorzonera   (Scorzonera hispanica ) are  Mediterranean natives. Their Eurasian relative burdock ( Arctium lappa ) is most  appreciated in Japan as   gobo.   All three of these elongated taproots become  undesirably fibrous with size and age, are rich in phenolic compounds (those in  gobo   are potent antioxidants), and therefore readily turn grayish-brown — at the  surface when cut and peeled, throughout when cooked.  Other Common Roots and Tubers  Chinese Water Chestnut and Tiger Nut   The Chinese water chestnut and the tiger  nut, or chufa, are both members of the sedge family, a group of water grasses that  includes   papyrus. The water chestnut   is a   swollen   underwater stem   tip of  Eleocharis dulcis,   a native of the Far East cultivated primarily in China and Japan.
(Horned water chestnuts or caltrops are the seeds of species of   Trapa,   water plants  native to Africa, central Europe, and Asia.) Tiger nuts are small tubers of   Cyperus  esculentus,   a native of northern Africa and the Mediterranean that was cultivated in  ancient Egypt. Both taste slightly sweet and nutty, and both are remarkable for  retaining their crispness when cooked and even when canned, thanks to phenolic  compounds in their cell walls that cross-link and strengthen them. The Spanish  make the sweet drink   horchata de chufa   from dried tiger nuts by soaking them in  water, grinding and resoaking, straining, and adding sugar.  In Asia, where Chinese and horned water chestnuts are sometimes cultivated in  contaminated water, these foods have been known to transmit cysts of a parasitic  intestinal fluke to people who shell them with their teeth. Fresh versions should be  washed and scrubbed thoroughly before trimming away their tough outer layer,  then washed again. A brief immersion in boiling water will guarantee their safety.  Crosnes, or Chinese Artichokes   Crosnes are small tubers of several species of  Stachys,   an Asian member of the mint family; they were brought from China to  France in the late 19th century. Crosnes are crisp and taste nutty and sweet,  something   like   a   sunchoke.   They’re   notable   for   containing   an   unusual  carbohydrate, stachyose, a combination of two galactoses and one sucrose. We  can’t digest stachyose, so a large serving of crosnes can cause gassy discomfort.  Crosnes contain little starch, and turn mushy when even slightly overcooked.  Jicama   Jicama is the swollen storage root of   Pachyrhizus erosus,   a South American  member of the bean family. Its main virtue is its sturdy crispness: it keeps well, is  slow to discolor, and retains some crunch when cooked. Jicama is often eaten raw,  in salads or dipped into a sauce, and is sometimes used as a fresh replacement for  Chinese water chestnuts, though it doesn’t have the same sweet and nutty  character.  Lotus Root   Lotus root is the muddwelling rhizome of   Nelumbo nucifera,   a water lily  native to Asia that has North American and Egyptian relatives. The lily is an  important image in Buddhism and other systems of thought — a stalk rising from  the mire to bear a beautiful flower over its floating leaves — so lotus root can carry  extraculinary connotations. The rhizome contains large void spaces, so cross-  sectional slices have a characteristic lacy pattern. It is crisp and remains so after  cooking, for the same reason that water chestnuts do. It has a mild aroma and  slight astringency, and discolors rapidly when cut due to phenolic compounds.
Lotus root is cooked in many different ways, after an initial peeling (and blanching  in the case of salads), from rapid stir-frying to braising and candying. Its modest  store of starch is also extracted.  Oca   Oca is the small tuber of a South American relative of wood sorrel,   Oxalis  tuberosa.   It is variably starchy or juicy, comes in a number of anthocyanin-based  skin colors, from yellow to red to purple, and is unusual in being distinctly tart,  thanks to the oxalic acid typical of the family. In Peru and Bolivia it’s usually cooked  in stews and soups.  Lower Stems and Bulbs: Beet, Turnip, Radish, Onion,  and Others  The members of this mixed category of vegetables sit at or just below ground  level, and have one characteristic in common: they store little starch compared to  most roots and tubers. They’re therefore usually less dense, cook more rapidly, and  retain a moist texture.  Beets  Beet “roots” are   mainly   the   lower   stem   of   Beta   vulgaris,   a   native   of   the  Mediterranean and Western Europe. People have eaten this plant since prehistory,  initially its leaves (chard, p. 325), then the underground part of specialized varieties  (subspecies   vulgaris).   In Greek times beet roots were long, either white or red, and  sweet; Theophrastus reported around 300   BCE   that they were pleasant enough to  eat raw. The fat red type is first depicted in the 16th century. Table beets are about  3% sugar and some large animal-feed varieties are 8%; in the 18th century,  selection for sugar production led to sugar beets with 20% sucrose.  Colored beets owe their red, orange, and yellow hues to betain pigments (p. 268),  which are water-soluble and stain other ingredients. There are variegated varieties  with alternating red layers of phloem tissue and unpigmented layers of xylem (p.  262); they look their best in raw slices because cooking causes cell damage and  pigment leakage. When we eat beets, the red pigment is usually decolorized by  high stomach acidity and reaction with iron in the large intestine, but people  sometimes   excrete   the   intact   pigment,   a   startling   but   harmless   event. The  persistent firmness of cooked beets is caused by phenolic reinforcement of the cell
walls, as in bamboo shoots and water chestnuts (p. 283).  Beet aroma comes largely from an earthy-smelling molecule called geosmin,  which was long thought to originate with soil microbes, but now appears also to  be produced by the beet root itself. The sugariness of beets is sometimes put to  use in chocolate cakes, syrups, and other sweets.  Celery Root  Celery root or celeriac is the swollen lower portion of the main stem of a special  variety of celery,   Apium graveolens   var.   rapaceum.   Roots project from a knobbly  surface that requires deep peeling. Celeriac tastes much like celery thanks to the  same oxygen-ring aromatics, and contains a moderate amount of starch (5–6% by  weight). It’s usually cooked like other root vegetables, but also finely shredded to  make a crunchy raw salad.  The Cabbage Family: Turnip, Radish  The turnip,   Brassica rapa,   has been under cultivation for about 4,000 years in  Eurasia as a staple, fast-growing food. It consists of both lower stem and taproot,  can have a number of different shapes and colors, and has the sulfury aroma  typical of the family (p. 321). Small, mild varieties may be eaten raw and crunchy  like radishes, larger ones cooked until soft: but not too long, or the overcooked  cabbage flavor dominates and the texture becomes mushy. Turnips are also  pickled.  The crisp, sometimes pungent radish is a different species,   Raphanus sativus,   a  native of western Asia, and had reached the Mediterranean by the time of the  ancient Egyptians and Greeks. Like the turnip it’s mainly a swollen lower stem, and  has been shaped by human selection into many distinctive forms and striking  colors (for example, green at the surface and red inside). Most familiar in the  United States are small, early-maturing spring varieties, usually with a bright red  skin, which take only a few weeks to grow, and become harsh and woody in  summer heat. These are usually eaten raw in salads. But there are also large  Spanish and German varieties, some with black skins and some white, that reach  several inches in diameter and mature over several months for harvest in the  autumn. These types are firm and dry, and take well to braising and roasting. And  there are the large, long white Asian radishes, best known by the Japanese term
daikon,   which can be more than a foot/25 cm long and weigh 6 lb/3 kg. They are  relatively mild and used both raw and cooked, sometimes almost as a crisp pear  might be. Radish pungency is created by an enzyme reaction that forms a volatile  mustard oil (p. 321). Much of that enzyme is found in the skin, so peeling will  moderate the pepperiness. Though most often eaten raw or pickled, radishes can  be cooked like turnips, a treatment that minimizes their pungency (the enzyme is  inactivated) and brings out their sweetness.  An unusual radish species,   R. caudatus,   is known as the “rat-tailed radish” because it  bears long edible seedpods.  The Onion Family: Onions, Garlic, Leeks  There are around 500 species in the genus   Allium,   a group of plants in the lily  family that are native to northern temperate regions. About 20 are important  human foods, and a handful have been prized for thousands of years, as is attested  by the well-known lament of the exiled Israelites in the Old Testament: “We  remember the fish, which we did eat in Egypt freely; the cucumbers, and the  melons, and the leeks, and the onions, and the garlic.” Onions, garlic, and most of  their relatives are grown primarily for their underground bulbs, which are made up  of swollen leaf bases or “scales” that store energy for the beginning of the next  growing season, and which naturally keep well for months. Like the sunchoke and  its relatives, the onion family accumulates energy stores not in starch, but in chains  of fructose sugars (p. 805), which long, slow cooking breaks down to produce a  marked sweetness. Of course the fresh green leaves of bulb-forming alliums are  also eaten, and nonbulbing kinds, including leeks, chives, and some onions, give  only their leaves.  The key to the onion family’s appeal is a strong, often pungent, sulfury flavor  whose original purpose was to deter animals from eating the plants. Cooking  transforms this chemical defense into a deliciously savory, almost meaty quality  that adds depth to many dishes in many cultures.
Onion and garlic bulbs. The bulbs in the onion family consist of a central stem bud and  surrounding leaf bases, which swell with stored nutrients during one growing season  and then supply them to the bud in the next.  The Flavors and Sting of Raw Alliums  The distinctive flavors of the onion family come from its defensive use of the  element sulfur. The growing plants take up sulfur from the soil and incorporate it  into four different kinds of chemical ammunition, which float in the cell fluids while  their enzyme trigger is held separately in a storage vacuole (p. 261). When the cell  is damaged by chopping or chewing, the enzyme escapes and breaks the  ammunition molecules in half to produce irritating, strong-smelling sulfurous  molecules. Some of these are very reactive and unstable, so they continue to  evolve into other compounds. The mixture of molecules produced creates the  food’s raw flavor, and depends on the initial ammunition, how thoroughly the  tissue is damaged, how much oxygen gets into the reactions, and how long the  reactions go on. Onion flavor typically includes apple-like, burning, rubbery, and  bitter notes; leek flavor has cabbage-like, creamy, and meaty aspects, while garlic  seems especially potent because it produces a hundredfold higher concentration  of initial reaction products than do other alliums. Chopping, pounding in a mortar,  and pureeing in a food processor all give distinctive results. Chopped alliums to be  eaten raw — as a garnish or in an uncooked sauce — are best rinsed to remove all  the sulfur compounds from the damaged surfaces, since these tend to become  harsher with time and exposure to the air.One sulfur product is produced in  significant quantities only in the onion, shallot, leek, chive, and rakkyo: the  “lacrimator,” which causes our eyes to water. This volatile chemical escapes from  the damaged onion into the air, and lands in the onion cutter’s eyes and nose,  where   it   apparently   attacks   nerve   endings   directly,   then   breaks   down   into
hydrogen sulfide, sulfur dioxide, and sulfuric acid. A very effective molecular  bomb! Its effects can be minimized by prechilling the onions for 30–60 minutes in  ice water. This treatment slows the ammunition-breaking enzyme down to a crawl,  and gives all the volatile molecules less energy to launch themselves into the air. It  also hydrates the papery onion skin, which makes it tougher and less brittle, and so  easier to peel off.  The Flavors of Cooked Alliums   When onions and their relatives are heated, the  various sulfur compounds react with each other and with other substances to  produce   a   range   of   characteristic   flavor   molecules.   The   cooking   method,  temperature, and medium strongly affect the flavor balance. Baking, drying, and  microwaving tend to generate trisulfides, the characteristic notes of overcooked  cabbage. Cooking at high temperatures in fat produces more volatiles and a  stronger flavor than do other techniques. Relatively mild garlic compounds persist  in butter but are changed to rubbery, pungent notes in more reactive unsaturated  vegetable oils. Blanching whole garlic apparently inactivates the flavor-generating  enzyme and limits its action, so the flavor of garlic cooked whole is only slightly  pungent, and sweet, nutty notes come to the fore. Similarly, pickled garlic and  onions are relatively mild.  The sugar and sugar-chain content of onions and garlic is largely responsible for  their readiness to brown when fried, and contributes a caramel note to the cooked  flavor.  Food Words:   Onion, Garlic, Shallot, Scallion  Vegetable names in the onion family come from diverse sources.   Onion   itself  comes from the Latin for “one,”   “oneness,”   “unity,” and was the name given by  Roman farmers to a variety of onion ( cepa ) that grew singly, without forming  multiple bulbs as garlic and shallots do.   Garlic   is an Anglo-Saxon word that  meant “spear-leek”: a leek with a slim, pointed leaf blade rather than a broad,  open one. And both   shallot   and   scallion   come via Latin from Ashqelon, the  Hebrew name for a city in what in classical times was southwest Palestine.  Onions and Shallots   Onions   are   plants   of the   species   Allium cepa,   which
originated in central Asia but has spread across the globe in hundreds of different  varieties. There are two major categories of market onions in the United States,  defined not by variety but by season and harvesting practice. Spring or short-day  onions are planted as seedlings in the late fall, and harvested before they’re fully  mature in the next spring and early summer. They’re relatively mild and moist and  perishable, and best kept in the refrigerator. A special category of spring onion is  the “sweet” onion — “mild” is more accurate — which is usually a standard yellow  spring onion grown in sulfur-poor soils, and therefore endowed with half or less of  the usual amounts of sulfur-containing defensive chemicals. The second major  kind of market onion is the storage onion, grown through the summer and  harvested when mature in the fall, rich in sulfur compounds, drier, and easily  stored in cool conditions for several months.  White onion varieties are somewhat moister and don’t keep quite as well as yellow  onions, which owe their color to phenolic flavonoid compounds. Red onions are  pigmented by water-soluble anthocyanins, but only in the surface layers of each  leaf scale, so cooking dilutes and dulls their color.  Green onions, or scallions, can be either bulb-forming onion varieties harvested  quite young, or special varieties that never do form bulbs. Shallots are a distinctive,  clustering variety of onion whose bulbs are smaller, finer-textured, and somewhat  milder and sweeter, often with a purple coloration. They’re especially valued in  France and southeast Asia.  Garlic   Garlic is the central Asian native   Allium sativum,   which produces a tight  head of a dozen or more bulbs, or “cloves.” “Elephant garlic” is actually a bulbing  variety of leek, with a milder flavor, and “wild garlic” yet another species,   A.  ursinum.   Unlike multilayered onion bulbs, garlic cloves consist of a single swollen  storage leaf surrounding the young shoot. That leaf contains much less water than  onion scales do — under 60% of its weight, compared to 90% for onions — and a  much higher concentration of fructose and fructose chains, so during frying or  roasting it dries out and browns much quicker than onions do.  There are many different garlic varieties, with different proportions of sulfur  compounds and so different flavors and pungencies. The main commercial  varieties are grown for their yield and storage life, not their flavor. Cold growing  conditions produce a more intense garlic flavor. Garlic is at its moistest soon after  harvest, from late summer to late fall, and becomes more concentrated as it slowly  dries out during storage. Refrigerated storage causes a decline in distinctively
garlicky flavor, and an increase in more generic onion flavors.  Because the peeling and chopping of the small cloves is tedious work, garlic is  sometimes prepared in quantity and then stored under oil for later use. This  procedure turns out to encourage the growth of deadly botulism bacteria, which  thrive in the absence of air. Bacterial growth can be prevented by soaking the  garlic in acidic vinegar or lemon juice for several hours before putting it under oil,  and by storing the container in the refrigerator. Occasionally, acid-pickled garlic  turns a strange shade of bluish-green, a reaction that apparently involves one of  the sulfurous flavor precursors. This discoloration can be minimized by blanching  the garlic before pickling.  Garlic on the Breath  Does the chemistry of garlic flavor offer any help when it comes to dealing  with garlic breath? One major component of garlic breath appears to be  various chemical relatives of skunk spray (e.g., methanethiol) that persist in  the mouth. Another component (methyl allyl sulfide) is apparently generated  from garlic as it passes through the digestive system, and peaks in the breath  between 6 and 18 hours after the meal. Residual thiols in the mouth can be  transformed into odorless molecules by the browning enzymes in many raw  fruits and vegetables (p. 269), so eating a salad or an apple will help.  Mouthwashes that contain strong oxidizing agents (e.g., chloramine) are also  effective. Sulfides from the digestive system are probably beyond our reach!  Leeks   Unlike onions and garlic, leeks don’t form useful storage bulbs, and are  grown instead for their scallion-like mass of fresh leaves. (There’s one exception to  this rule: the leek variety confusingly named “elephant garlic” because it produces  a garlic-like bulb cluster that can reach 1 lb/450 gm.) Leeks are very tolerant of cold  and in many regions can be harvested throughout the winter. They grow to a large  size, and the prized white base portion of their leaves is often increased (to as  much as 1 ft/3 m long and 3 in/7.5 cm thick) by hilling soil up around the growing  plant to shield more of it from the sun. This practice also fills the spaces between  leaves with grit, and necessitates careful washing. The inner leaves (and seldom-
used roots) have the strongest flavor. The upper green portion of each leek leaf is  edible, but tends to be tougher and to have a less oniony, more cabbage-like flavor  than the lower white portion. It’s also rich in long-chain carbohydrates that give  the cooked vegetable a slippery texture, will gel when chilled, and can lend body  to soups and stews.  Important Members of the Onion Family  Onions, scallions   Allium cepa  Shallots   Allium cepa   var.   ascalonicum  Garlic   Allium sativum  Leeks, wild   Allium ampeloprasum  Leeks, cultivated   Allium ampeloprasum   var.  porrum  Great-headed (elephant)  garlic  Allium ampeloprasum   var.  gigante  Leeks, Egyptian   Allium kurrat  Ramps, ramson (broad-leaf  leek)   Allium tricoccum  Chives   Allium schoenoprasum  Chives, “garlic” or “Chinese”   Allium tuberosum  Japanese long onion   Allium ramosum  Japanese bunching onion   Allium fistulosum  Rakkyo   Allium chinense  Stems and Stalks: Asparagus, Celery, and Others  Vegetables   derived   from   plant   stems   and   stalks   often   present   a   particular  challenge to the cook. Stems and stalks support other plant parts and conduct  essential nutrients to and from them, so they consist in large part of fibrous
vascular tissue and special stiffening fibers — for example, the ridges along the  outer edge of celery and cardoons — that are from 2 to 10 times tougher than the  vascular fibers themselves. These fibrous materials become increasingly reinforced  with insoluble cellulose as the stem or stalk matures. Sometimes there’s nothing to  do except to strip away the fibers, or cut the vegetable into thin pieces to minimize  their fibrousness, or puree them and strain off the fibers. The keys to tender celery,  cardoons, and rhubarb are on the farm rather than in the kitchen: choosing the  right variety, providing plenty of water so that the stalks can support themselves  with turgor pressure (p. 264), and providing mechanical support by hilling with soil  or tying the stalks together, so that mechanical stress doesn’t induce fiber growth.  One group of stem vegetables is inherently tender: the tips of such crop plants as  peas, melons and squashes, grapevines, and hops, which grow rapidly in the  spring, and have long been enjoyed as among the first fresh vegetables of the new  season.  Asparagus  Asparagus is the main stalk of a plant in the lily family,   Asparagus officinalis,   a  native of Eurasia that was a delicacy in Greek and Roman times. The stalk doesn’t  support ordinary leaves; the small projections from the stem are leaf-like bracts  that shield immature clusters of feathery photosynthetic branches. The stalks grow  up from long-lived underground rhizomes, and have been widely prized as a  tender manifestation of spring. Many other vegetables have been called “poor  man’s asparagus,” including young leeks, blackberry shoots, and hop shoots. It  remains expensive today because the shoots grow at different rates and must be  harvested by hand. In Europe, the even more labor-intensive white version,  blanched by being covered with soil and cut from underground, has been popular  since the 18th century. It has a more delicate aroma than green asparagus (which  is rich in dimethyl sulfide and other sulfur volatiles), and some bitterness toward  the stem end. Exposed to light after harvest, white asparagus will turn yellow or  red.   Purple   asparagus   varieties   are   colored with   anthocyanins,   whose   color  generally fades during cooking, leaving the green of the chlorophyll.  Harvested early and fresh from the soil, asparagus is very juicy and noticeably  sweet (perhaps 4% sugar). As the season progresses, the rhizomes become  depleted of stored energy, and sugar levels in the shoots decline. Once harvested,
the actively growing shoot continues to consume its sugars, and does so more  rapidly than any other common vegetable. Its flavor flattens out; it loses its  juiciness, and it becomes increasingly fibrous from the base up. These changes are  especially rapid in the first 24 hours after harvest, and are accelerated by warmth  and light. Moisture and sugar losses can be partly remedied by soaking the spears  in dilute sugar water (5–10%, or 5–10 gm per 100 ml/1–2 teaspoons per half-cup)  before cooking. White asparagus is always more fibrous than green and toughens  faster in storage. It and some green asparagus may be peeled to remove some  unsoftenable tissue, but woody lignin formation also takes place deeper in the  stem. Cooks have dealt with this internal toughening in the same way for 500  years: they bend the stalk, and allow mechanical stress to find the border between  tough and tender and break the two apart.  Asparagus and its peculiar branches, the phylloclades, which are clustered near the tip  of the immature stem.  Asparagus has long been notorious for an unusual side effect on those who eat it:  it gives a strong odor to their urine. Apparently the body metabolizes a sulfur-  containing substance, asparagusic acid, a close chemical relative of the essence of  skunk spray called methanethiol. In part because some people claim to be  immune to this effect, biochemists have studied this phenomenon in some detail.  It now appears that thanks to genetic differences, most but not all people do  produce methanethiol after eating asparagus, and most but not all are able to  smell it.  Asparagus Aromatics  Not only can people differ in their ability to detect the product of asparagus  metabolism, those who can detect it differ in their assessment.  [Asparagus] cause a filthy and disagreeable smell in the urine, as
everybody knows.  — Louis Lemery,   Treatise of All Sorts of Foods,   1702  …all night long after a dinner at which I had partaken of [asparagus],  they played (lyrical and coarse in their jesting as the fairies in  Shakespeare’s   Dream ) at transforming my chamber pot into a vase of  aromatic perfume.  — Marcel Proust,   In Search of Lost Time,   1913  The Carrot Family: Celery and Fennel  The carrot family has provided two aromatic stalk vegetables.  Celery   Celery,   Apium graveolens,   is the mild, enlarged version of a bitter, thin-  stalked Eurasian herb called smallage. Chinese celery (var.   secalinum ) is closer in  form and favor to smallage, while Asian water celery is a more distant relative  ( Oenanthe javanica ) with a distinctive flavor. Our familiar celery was apparently  bred in 15thcentury Italy, and remained a delicacy well into the 19th. It consists of  greatly enlarged, pleasantly crunchy leaf stalks, or petioles, and has a distinctive  but subtle aroma due to unusual compounds called phthalides that it shares with  walnuts (hence their successful pairing in Waldorf salads), and terpenes that  provide light pine and citrus notes. Celery is often combined with carrots and  onions   in   gently   fried   aromatic   base   preparations   for   other   dishes   (French  mirepoix,   Italian   soffrito,   Spanish   sofregit;   in   the   Louisiana   Cajun “trinity” of  aromatics the carrots are replaced by green capsicums). In parts of Europe, celery  has   been   preferred   in   a   more   delicately   favored   blanched   form,   originally  produced by covering the growing stalks with soil, then by growing pale green  “self-blanching” varieties. Celery is often served raw, and its crispness is maximized  by presoaking in cold water (p. 265). Both celery and celery root contain defensive  chemicals that can cause skin and other reactions in sensitive people (p. 259).  Fennel   Bulb or Florence or finocchio fennel is a vegetable variety (var. azoricum) of  Foeniculum vulgare,   the plant that produces fennel seeds (p. 415). Its enlarged leaf-  stalk bases form a tight, bulb-like cluster. (The rest of the leaf stalk, the equivalent  of celery stalk, remains tough and fibrous.) Fennel has a strong anise aroma thanks
to the same chemical (anethole) that flavors anise seeds and star anise, and this  makes fennel a more dominating, less versatile ingredient than celery and carrots.  It also has a distinct citrus note (from the terpene limonene) that’s especially  prominent in the sparse foliage. Fennel is eaten both raw, thinly sliced and  crunchy, and cooked, often braised or in a gratin.  The Cabbage Family: Kohlrabi and Rutabaga  Kohlrabi   Kohlrabi is a version of the basic cabbage plant ( Brassica oleracea   var.  gongylodes ) in which the main stem swells to several inches in diameter. It has the  moist texture and mild flavor of broccoli stalk. The name comes from the German  for “cabbage turnip,” and indeed kohlrabi resembles a turnip in its rounded  appearance. Young kohlrabi are tender enough to eat raw for their crisp moistness  or cook briefly; overmature stems are woody.  Rutabaga   The rutabaga, or swede, is the result of a cross between the turnip and  cabbage species, and is thought to have been born sometime before 1600 in  Eastern Europe, perhaps in gardens where kale and turnips were growing side by  side. Like kohlrabi, it’s a swollen portion of the main stem; like the turnip, it may be  white or yellow. It is sweeter and starchier than the turnip or kohlrabi, though still  with only half the carbohydrate content of a potato; it’s often boiled and mashed.  Tropical Stems: Bamboo Shoots and Hearts of Palm  Bamboo Shoots   Bamboo shoots are the very young stems of several tropical  Asian bamboos (species of   Phyllostachys   and others), which are woody members of  the grass family. As the new shoots begin to break the soil surface, additional soil is  heaped on to minimize their exposure to light and thereby their production of  bitter cyanide-generating compounds (p. 258). Cooks and food manufacturers  then eliminate all cyanide compounds from the fresh shoots by boiling them in  water until they’re no longer bitter. Along with Chinese water chestnuts and lotus  root, bamboo shoots are valued for the ability to retain their firm, crisp, meaty  texture during and after cooking, and even after the extreme heat treatment of  canning (p. 283). Their flavor has an unusual medicinal or barnyard note thanks to  cresol, as well as more common bready and brothy aromas from simple sulfur  compounds (methional, dimethyl sulfide).  Hearts of Palm   Hearts of palm are the growing stem tips of various palm trees,
especially the South American peach palm   Bactris gasipaes,   which readily resprouts  after its tip is cut. The tissue is fine-grained and crisp, with a sweet and slightly  nutty taste, and is eaten both raw and cooked. Hearts of other palms may have a  bitter edge and a tendency to brown discoloration; and their harvest often results  in the wasteful death of the entire tree.  Other Stem and Stalk vegetables  Cactus Pads or Nopales   Cactus pads, nopales, and nopalitos are all names for the  flattened stem segments of the prickly-pear cactus   Opuntia ficus-indica   (p. 369), a  native of the arid regions of Mexico and the U.S. Southwest. They’re eaten raw in  salads   or   salsas,   baked,   fried,   pickled,   and   added   to   stews.   Nopalitos   are  remarkable for two things: a mucilage that probably helps them retain water, and  that can give them a somewhat slimy consistency (dry cooking methods minimize  this), and a startling tartness thanks to their malic acid content. Cactuses, purslane,  and other plants that live in hot, dry environments have developed a special form  of photosynthesis in which they keep their pores closed during the day to  conserve water, then open them at night to take in carbon dioxide, which they  then store in the form of malic acid. During the day, they use the energy from  sunlight to convert the malic acid to glucose. Pads harvested in the early morning  therefore contain as much as 10 times more malic acid than pads harvested in the  afternoon. The acid levels in the pads slowly drop after harvest, so the difference is  less apparent after a few days.  Cardoons   Cardoons are the leaf stalks of   Cynara cardunculus,   the Mediterranean  plant from which the artichoke ( C. scolymus ) apparently descends; the stalks are  often covered for several weeks before harvest to protect them from sunlight, or  blanch them. Cardoons have a flavor quite similar to the artichoke’s, and are  abundantly endowed with astringent, bitter phenolic compounds that quickly  form brown complexes when the tissue is cut or damaged. They’re often cooked in  milk, whose proteins bind phenolic compounds and can reduce astringency (as in  tea, p. 440). Phenolics can also cause a toughening of cell walls, and cardoon fibers  are often remarkably resistant to softening. Bringing them to a gradual boil in  several changes of water can help leach out phenolics and soften them, though  flavor is leached out as well. Sometimes it’s necessary to peel the reinforcing fibers  from the cardoon stalk, or cut it into thin cross sections to keep the fibers relatively  short and inconspicuous.
Fiddleheads   Fiddleheads are the immature leaf stalk and fronds of ferns, named  for the resemblance of their furled tips to the scroll of a violin. Long a traditional  springtime delicacy, harvested as the fern fronds begin to elongate and unroll but  before they toughen, fiddleheads are now cause for some caution. A common  species   especially   enjoyed   in   Japan   and   Korea,   the   bracken   fern   Pteridium  aequilinum,   has been found to contain a potent DNA-damaging chemical (p. 259).  It should be avoided. Stalks of the ostrich fern, various species of   Matteuccia,   are  thought to be safer to eat.  Rhubarb   Rhubarb, the leaf stalks of a large perennial herb, is unusual for  containing a high concentration of oxalic acid. Its main use in the West is as a tart  stand-in for fruit, so I describe it in the next chapter (p. 367).  Sea Beans   Sea beans are the small, fleshy stems and branches of salt-tolerant and  salty seacoast plants in the genus   Salicornia,   which is in the beet family. They are  known under many other names, including samphire (a name they share with a  seacoast plant in the carrot family), glasswort, pick-leweed, and poussepierre.  Young plants are crisp and tender and can be eaten raw or briefly blanched for  their fresh, briny flavor; older ones can be cooked or steamed with seafood to  intensify the sea aroma.  Sprouts   Sprouts are seedlings, newborn plants just an inch or so long, and are  mainly stem, which elongates to push the first set of leaves aboveground into the  sunlight. Of course these infantile stems are tender and not at all fibrous; they’re  usually eaten raw or very briefly cooked. Many different plants are germinated to  make edible sprouts, but most of them come from a handful of families: the beans  (mung and soy, alfalfa), the grains (wheat, corn), the cabbage family (cress,  broccoli, mustard, radish), the onion family (onions, chives). Because seedlings are  so vulnerable, they’re sometimes protected with strong chemical defenses. In  alfalfa sprouts, the defenses include the toxic amino acid canavanine (p. 259); in  broccoli sprouts, the defenses are sulforaphanes, a kind of isothiocyanate (p. 321)  that appears to help prevent the development of cancer. Because the wet, warm  conditions of sprout production also favor the growth of microbes, raw sprouts are  frequently a cause of food poisoning. They should be bought as fresh as possible  and kept refrigerated, and are safest when cooked thoroughly.
Leaves: Lettuces, Cabbages, and Others  Leaves are the quintessential vegetable. They’re usually the most prominent and  abundant parts of a plant, and they’re nutritious enough that many of our primate  relatives eat little else. The salad of raw greens is a truly primeval dish! People also  cook and eat the leaves of many different plants, from weeds to root and fruit  crops. In temperate regions, nearly all the tender leaves of spring are edible, and  were traditionally a welcome harbinger of the new crops to come after winter’s  scarcity; in northeast Italy, for example,   pistic   is a springtime collection of more  than 50 different wild greens boiled and then sauteed together.  Because they’re thin and broad, leaves both edible (lettuce, cabbage, grape) and  inedible (banana, fig, bamboo) are used as wrappers to contain, protect, and  aromatize fillings of meat, fish, grains, and other foods. They’re often blanched first  to make the leaves flaccid and pliable.  Though many leaf vegetables have distinctive flavors, most of them share a  common, fresh aroma note referred to as “green” or “grassy.” This comes from  particular molecules that are 6 carbon atoms long — “leaf alcohol” (hexanol) and  “leaf aldehyde” (hexanal) — and that are produced when leaves are cut or crushed.  The cell damage frees enzymes that break up the long fatty-acid carbon chains in  the membranes of the chloroplasts (p. 261). Cooking inactivates the enzymes and  causes their products to react with other molecules, so the fresh green note fades  and other aromas become more prominent.  Preparing Salads  Even though salads of raw greens don’t require cooking, they do require care  in the preparation. Start with good ingredients: fresh young leaves are the  least fibrous and have the most delicate flavor, while old overgrown lettuces  can taste almost rubbery. If the leaves need to be divided into smaller pieces,  this should be done with the least possible physical pressure, which can crush  cells and initiate the development of off-flavors and darkened patches.  Cutting with a sharp knife is generally the most effective method; tearing by  hand requires squeezing, which may damage tender leaves. The greens
should be well rinsed in several changes of water to remove grit, soil, and  other surface contamination. Soaking them for a while in ice water will fill  their cells with any water they’ve lost, making them turgid and crisp. Dry the  greens as thoroughly as possible, so that the dressing will coat the leaves  without being diluted. Thick, viscous dressings are slower to run off the leaf  surface than thin, runny ones. A simple vinaigrette dressing (p. 637) can be  made more viscous by chilling it in the freezer.  Oil-based dressings like vinaigrettes should be added only at the last minute,  because oil readily wets the waxy leaf cuticle, percolates through the empty  spaces within, and soon makes the leaf dark and sodden. Water-based cream  dressings are better for greens that need to be dressed well in advance of  eating.  The Lettuce Family: Lettuces, Chicories, Dandelion Greens  The lettuce family, or the Compositae, is the second largest family of flowering  plants, and yet it contributes only a few food plants. The most prominent are  lettuce and its relatives, the primary components of our raw salads.  Lettuces: Nonbitter Greens   Today’s mild, widely popular lettuces, varieties of the  species   Lactuca sativa,   derive from an inedibly bitter weedy ancestor,   L. serriola,  that grew in Asia and the Mediterranean and has been under cultivation and  improvement for 5,000 years. Lettuce seems to be represented in some ancient  Egyptian art, and was certainly enjoyed by the Greeks and by the Romans, who  had several varieties and ate them cooked as well as raw in salads at the beginning  or end of the meal. The first syllable of its Latin name,   lac,   means “milk,” and refers  to the defensive white latex that oozes from the freshly cut base. Though lettuce is  now mostly eaten raw in the West, in Asia it’s often shredded and cooked. This can  be a good use for the older, tougher leaves sometimes found on supermarket  lettuces.  There are several broad groups of lettuce varieties, each with a characteristic  growth form and texture (see box below). Most lettuces have a similar taste,  though   some   red-leaf   lettuces   are   noticeably   astringent   thanks   to   their
anthocyanin   pigments.   Generally,   varieties   whose   leaves   are   shielded   from  sunlight by the formation of a head offer much lower levels of vitamins and  antioxidants. The pale, watery crisphead variety known as iceberg triumphed in  the United States due to a combination of its durability in shipping and storage —  it brought lettuce to the American table year-round in the 1920s — and its  refreshing, crunchy-wet texture. Head lettuces respire more slowly and so keep  better than leaf lettuces; both keep significantly longer at 32ºF/0ºC than at  40ºF/4ºC. There’s also a type known as stem lettuce, or celtuce; it’s especially  popular in Asia for its prominent and crisp stalk, which is stripped of its small  leaves, peeled, sliced, and cooked. Stem lettuce and the solid core of leaf lettuces  are sometimes even candied.  Greens from the Lettuce Family  Lactuca sativa:   nonbitter lettuces  Loose-leaf varieties: open cluster of leaves  Butter varieties: open cluster of soft, tender leaves, small midribs  Batavian varieties: semi-open cluster of crisp, dense leaves  Cos, Romaine varieties: loose head of elongated large leaves, prominent midribs  Crisphead varieties: large, tightly wrapped heads of brittle, crunchy leaves  Cichorium intybus:   bitter chicories  Chicory: open cluster of prominent stems and leaves  Belgian “endive,” witloof: tight elongated head of blanched crisp leaves  Radicchio: tight round to elongated head of red leaves  Puntarelle: open cluster of prominent narrow stems and leaves  Cichorium endivia:   bitter endives  Curly endive: open cluster of curly leaves  Frisée: open cluster of finely cut, frizzy leaves  Escarole: open cluster of moderately broad leaves
Chicories and Endives: Bitterness Under Control   The original intense bitterness  of lettuce, which came from a terpene compound called lactucin and its relatives,  has been bred out of the cultivated forms. But a number of close lettuce relatives  are cultivated and included in salads or cooked on their own especially to provide  a civilized dose of bitterness. These are plants in the genus   Cichorium,   which  include endive, escarole, chicory, and radicchio. Growers go to a lot of trouble to  control their bitterness. Open rosettes of escaroles and endives are often tied into  an artificial head to keep the inner leaves in the dark and relatively mild. And  popular “Belgian endive,” also known as   witloof   (“white-head”), is a double-grown,  slightly bitter version of an otherwise very bitter chicory. The plant is grown from  seed in the spring, defoliated and dug up in the fall, and the taproot with its  nutrient reserves kept in cold storage. The root is then either replanted indoors  and kept covered with soil and sand as it leafs out, or else it’s grown hydroponically  in the dark. The root takes about a month to develop a fist-sized head of white to  pale green leaves, with a delicate flavor and crunchy yet tender texture. This  delicacy is easily lost. Exposing the heads to light in the market will induce  greening and bitterness in the outer leaves, and the flavor becomes harsh.  Salads of bitter greens are often accompanied by a salty dressing or other  ingredients; salt not only balances the bitterness, but actually suppresses our  perception of bitterness.  Dandelion Greens   The dandelion ( Taraxicum officinale ) seems to be found  naturally on all continents, although most cultivated varieties are native to Eurasia.  It’s occasionally grown on a small scale, and has been gathered from the wild (or  the back-yard) since prehistory. The plant is a perennial, so if its taproot is left  intact, it will give a rosette of leaves repeatedly. The bitter leaves are often  blanched before eating to make them more palatable.  The Cabbage Family: Cabbage, Kale, Brussels Sprouts, and  Others  Like the onion family, the cabbage family is a group of formidable chemical  warriors with strong flavors. It’s also a uniquely protean family. From two weedy  natives of the Mediterranean and central Asia, we have managed to develop more  than a dozen major crops of very different kinds: some leaves, some flowers, some  stems, some seeds. Then there are a dozen or more relatives, notably the radishes
and mustards (see chapter 8 for the spicy ones), and crosses between species:  altogether a rich and ongoing collaboration between nature’s inventiveness and  our own! Beyond the cabbage family itself, some of its distant botanical relatives  share elements of its biochemistry and therefore its flavor; these include capers  and papayas (pp. 409, 381).  The Cabbage Family: Relationships and Pungencies  Botanical nomenclature is constantly evolving, especially in complicated  groups like the cabbage family. Though particular names may change, the  broad relationships shown here seem secure.  Mediterranean origins  •   Brassica oleracea  •   Cabbage (var.   capitata )  •   Portuguese cabbage (var.   tronchuda )  •   Kale, collards (var.   acephala )  •   Broccoli (var.   italica )  •   Cauliflower (var.   botrytis )  •   Brussels sprouts (var.   gemmifera )  •   Kohlrabi (var.   gongylodes )  •   Mustard, black:   Brassica nigra  •   Mustard, white:   Sinapis alba  •   Rocket; arugula:   Eruca sativa, Diplotaxis   species  •   Watercress:   Nasturtium   species  •   Garden cress:   Lepidium   species  •   Upland, winter cress:   Barbarea   species  •   Nasturtium:   Tropaeolum   species  •   Garlic mustard:   Alliaria   species
Central Asian origins  •   Brassica rapa  •   Turnip (var.   rapifera )  •   Broccoli rabe, broccoletti di rape (var.   rapifera )  •   Chinese cabbage, bok choy (var.   chinensis )  •   Chinese cabbage, napa (var.   pekinensis )  •   Tatsoi (var.   narinosa )  •   Mizuna, mibuna (var.   nipposinica )  •   Chinese kale/broccoli, gai lan:   Brassica oleracea   var.   alboglabra   Radish:  Raphanus sativus  •   Horseradish:   Armoracia rusticana  Recent Hybrids  •   Accidental  •   Rutabaga, canola:   Brassica napus   ( rapa   x   oleracea )  •   Brown mustard, mustard greens:   Brassica juncea   ( rapa   x   nigra )  •   Ethiopian mustard:   Brassica carinata   ( oleracea   x   nigra )  •   Intentional  •   Broccolini:   Brassica oleracea   x   alboglabra  Relative Amounts of Sulfur Pungency Precursors  Brussels sprouts   35  Green cabbage   26  Broccoli   17  White cabbage   15  Horseradish   11  Red cabbage   10  Radish   7
Chinese cabbage   3  Cauliflower   2  The Flavor Chemistry of the Cabbage Family   Like onions, cabbages and their  relatives   stockpile   two   kinds   of   defensive   chemicals   in   their   tissues:   flavor  precursors, and enzymes that act on the precursors to liberate the reactive flavors.  When the plant’s cells are damaged, the two stockpiles are mixed, and the  enzymes start a chain of reactions that generates bitter, pungent, and strong-  smelling compounds. The special cabbage-family system is effective enough to  have inspired a notorious man-made version, the mustard gas of World War I. And  the cabbage family turns out to have parts of the onion defensive system (p. 310)  as well; these contribute some sulfur aromatics to the overall family flavor.  The   stockpiled   defensive   precursors   in   the   cabbage   family   are   called  glucosinolates.   They differ from the onion precursors in containing not only sulfur,  but also nitrogen, so they and their immediate flavor products, mainly the  isothiocyanates,   have distinctive qualities. Some of the flavor precursors and  products are very bitter, and some have significant effects on our metabolism.  Particular isothiocyanates interfere with the proper function of the thyroid gland  and can cause it to enlarge if the diet is poor in iodine. But others help protect  against the development of cancer by fine-tuning our system for disposing of  foreign chemicals. This is the case for substances in broccoli and broccoli sprouts.  A given vegetable will contain a number of different precursor glucosinolates, and  the combinations are characteristic. This is why cabbage, brussels sprouts, broccoli,  and mustard greens have similar but distinctive flavors. The chemical defensive  system is most active — and the flavor strongest — in young, actively growing  tissues: the center of brussels sprouts, for example, and portions of the cabbage  core, which are twice as active as the outer leaves. Growing conditions have a  strong influence on the amounts of flavor precursors the plant stockpiles. Summer  temperatures and drought stress increase them, while the cold, wetness, and dim  sunlight of autumn and winter reduce them. Autumn and winter vegetables are  usually milder.  The Effects of Chopping   Different preparation and cooking methods give different
flavor balances in cabbage relatives. It’s been found, for example, that simply  chopping cabbage — for making coleslaw, for example — increases not only the  liberation of flavor compounds from precursors, but also increases the production  of the precursors! And if the chopped cabbage is then dressed with an acidic  sauce, some pungent products increase sixfold. (Soaking the chopped cabbage in  cold water will leach out most of the flavor compounds formed by chopping, at  the same time that it hydrates the leaves and makes them crisper.) When cabbages  and their relatives are fermented to make sauerkraut and other pickles, nearly all of  the flavor precursors and their products are transformed into less bitter, less  pungent substances.  The Effects of Heat   Heating cabbages and their friends has two different effects.  Initially the temperature rise within the tissue speeds the enzyme activity and  flavor generation, with maximum activity at around 140ºF/60ºC. The enzymes stop  working altogether somewhere short of the boiling point. If the enzymes are  quickly inactivated by plunging the vegetables into abundant boiling water, then  many of the flavor precursor molecules will be left intact. This isn’t always  desirable: cooking some mustard greens quickly, for example, minimizes their hot  pungency but preserves the intense bitterness of their pungency precursors.  Boiling in a large excess of water leaches flavor molecules out into the water, and  produces a milder flavor than does stir-frying or steaming. If the cooking period is  prolonged, then the constant heat gradually transforms the flavor molecules.  Eventually the sulfur compounds end up forming trisulfides, which accumulate  and are mainly responsible for the strong and lingering smell of overcooked  cabbage. Prolonged cooking makes members of the onion family more sweet and  mellow, but the cabbage family gets more overbearing and unpleasant.  Thanks to the fact that they share some enzyme systems, mixtures of the onion  and cabbage families can produce surprising effects. Add bits of raw scallion to  some   cooked   and   therefore   nonpungent   mustard   greens,   and   the   scallion  enzymes will transform heat-stable mustard precursors into pungent products: so  the bits of scallion taste more mustardy than the greens themselves!
Some vegetables in the remarkably various cabbage family. Center: Kale leaf. To its  right and clockwise: The swollen stem of kohlrabi, the terminal bud of head cabbage,  the lateral buds of brussels sprouts, the flowering stalk of broccoli, and cauliflower, a  mass of undeveloped flower stalks.  Cabbage, Kale, Collards, Brussels Sprouts   The original wild cabbage is native to  the Mediterranean seaboard, and this salty, sunny habitat accounts for the thick,  succulent, waxy leaves and stalks that help make these plants so hardy. It was  domesticated around 2,500 years ago, and thanks to its tolerance of cold climates,  it became an important staple vegetable in Eastern Europe. The practice of  pickling it appears to have originated in China.  Collards, kale, and Portuguese tronchuda cabbage resemble wild cabbage in  bearing separate leaves along a fairly short main stalk; tronchuda has especially  massive midribs. Cultivated cabbage forms a large head of closely nested leaves  around the tip of the main stalk. There are many varieties, some dark green, some  nearly white, some red with anthocyanin pigments, some deeply ridged, and some  smooth. In general, open-leaved plants accumulate more vitamins C and A and  antioxidant carotenoids than heading varieties whose inner leaves never see the  light of day. Heading cabbages often contain more sugar, and store well for  months after harvest.
Food Words:   Cabbage, Kale, Collards, Cauliflower  Several vegetables in the cabbage family,   kale, collards,   and   cauliflower,   have  names that derive from the Latin word   caulis,   meaning “stem” or “stalk,” the  part of the plant from which the edible portions emerge.   Cabbage   itself  comes from the Latin   caput,   meaning “head”: it’s the one form in which the  stem is reduced to a short stub, and the leaves form a head around it.  Brussels sprouts come from a cabbage variant that develops small, numerous  heads along a greatly elongated central stalk. It may have been developed in  northern Europe in the 15th century, but clear evidence for its existence only dates  from the 18th. For many people who are sensitive to bitter tastes, brussels sprouts  are simply too bitter to eat. They contain very high levels of glucosinolates. One of  the major types (sinigrin, also the major mustard precursor) tastes bitter itself but  produces a nonbitter thiocyanate, while the other (progoitrin) is nonbitter but  produces a bitter thiocyanate. So whether we cook sprouts rapidly to minimize the  production of thiocyanates, or slowly to transform all of the glucosinolates, the  result is still bitter. Since these flavor components are concentrated in the center of  the sprout, it helps to halve the sprouts and cook them in a large pot of boiling  water, which will leach out both precursors and products.  Rocket, Cress, Mustard Greens, Ethiopian Mustard   Rocket (or Italian arugula,  both from the Latin root   roc   meaning “harsh, rough”) is the name given to several  different plants and their leaves, all small, weedy cabbage relatives from the  Mediterranean region that are especially pungent, with a full, almost meaty flavor  built from various aldehydes, including almond-essence benzaldehyde. They’re  frequently used to enliven a salad of mixed greens, but are also pureed into a  brilliant green sauce or put on pizzas. Even the briefest cooking will inactivate their  protection-generating enzymes and turn them into tame greens. Some large-  leaved varieties are quite mild. Like rocket, the different forms of cress — water,  garden, winter — are small-leaved and pungent, usually used as a garnish or as a  refreshing counterpoint to a rich meat. Their close relative, the window box  nasturtium plant, sometimes lends its slightly pungent flower for a garnish; the  more peppery flower buds are also used.  Mustard greens are leaves from varieties of brown mustard ( B. juncea ) that have
been selected for their foliage rather than their seeds. Their texture is more  delicate than that of cabbage. They’re often quite pungent in the fashion of seed  mustard, but are usually cooked, which may leave them mild and cabbage-like or  intensely bitter, depending on the variety. Ethiopian mustard, a natural hybrid  between the cabbage and mustard groups, probably arose in northeastern Africa,  where the fast-growing young leaves are eaten both raw and lightly cooked. An  improved variety developed in the United States is called texsel greens.  Asian Cabbages and Relatives   The several very different forms of Chinese  cabbage, including bok choy, napa, and tatsoi, all stem from the same species of  Brassica   that gave us the turnip.   B. rapa   is one of the oldest cultivated plants,  possibly bred first for its seeds, and now among the most important vegetables in  Asia. The larger modern forms are mainly elongated heads weighing up to 10  lb/4.5 kg, and are distinguished from European cabbages by their prominent white  midribs, less prominent light green leaves, and mildness. Their smaller relatives  mizuna and mibuna form low, spreading clumps of long, narrow leaves, those of  mizuna being finely divided and feathery. Tatsoi makes a rosette of rounded leaves.  These small leaves do well as additions to Western salads; they tolerate storage and  dressings better than more delicate lettuces.  Spinach and Chard  Spinach   Spinach ( Spinacia oleracea ) is a member of the beet family that was  domesticated in central Asia, and is most productive in the cool seasons (heat and  long days cause it to go to seed while it has relatively few leaves). In the late  Middle Ages the Arabs brought it to Europe, where it soon displaced its smaller-  leaved relatives orache and lamb’s-quarters, as well as amaranth and sorrel. In the  classic cuisine of France, spinach was likened to   cire-vierge,   or virgin beeswax,  capable of receiving any impression or effect, while most other vegetables  imposed their taste upon the dish. Today it’s the most important leaf vegetable  apart from lettuce, valued for its rapid growth, mild flavor, and tender texture  when briefly cooked. (Some varieties are tender when raw, while thick-leaved  varieties are chewy and less suitable for salads.) When cooked, its volume is  reduced by about three-quarters. Spinach has a high content of potentially  troublesome oxalates (p. 259), but it remains an excellent source of vitamin A as  well as of phenolic antioxidants and compounds that reduce potential cancer-  causing damage to our DNA. Folic acid was first purified from spinach, which is our
richest source of this important vitamin (p. 255).  A number of unrelated but tender-leafed plants are called spinach. Malabar  spinach is an Asian climber,   Basella alba,   notable for its heat tolerance and the  mucilaginous texture of its leaves, which may be green or red. New Zealand  spinach   is   a   relative   of   the   succulent   ice   plant   (also   eaten!),   Tetragonia  tetragonioides,   productive in hot weather but thick-leaved and best when cooked.  Water spinach is an Asian relative of the sweet potato,   Ipomoea aquatica,   with  elongated leaves and crunchy, hollow stems that are good at taking up sauce.  Chard   Chard is the name given to varieties of the beet,   Beta vulgaris,   that have  been selected for thick, meaty leaf stalks (subspecies   cicla ) rather than their roots.  The beet is a distant relative of spinach, and its leaves — including ordinary, thin-  midribbed beet greens — also contain oxalates. Chard stalks and leaf veins can be  colored brilliant yellow, orange, and crimson by the same betain pigments that  color the roots, which are water-soluble and stain cooking liquids and sauces.  Some of the recently revived colored varieties are heirlooms that go back to the  16th century.  Miscellaneous Leafy Greens  Here are notes on a select handful of the many other greens that find their way to  the table.  Amaranth   Amaranth (species of   Amaranthus ), sometimes called Chinese spinach  and other names, has been enjoyed since ancient times in both Europe and Asia.  Its tender, earthy-flavored leaves are rich in vitamin A, but also in oxalates: two to  three times more than spinach, for example. Boiling in copious water will remove  some of them.  Grape Leaves   Grape leaves are best known in pickled form as the wrappers for  Greek dolmades. They are more delicate and delicious when blanched fresh. Grape  leaves are distinctly tart from their large store of malic and tartaric acids.  Mâche   Mâche, also known as lamb’s lettuce or corn salad ( Valerianella locusta   and  V. eriocarpa ), has small, tender, slightly mucilaginous leaves and a distinctive,  complex, fruity-flowery aroma (from various esters, linalool, mushroomy octenol,  and lemony citronellol), which make it a popular addition or alternative to a lettuce  salad in Europe.
Nettles   Nettles ( Urtica dioica ) are a common Eurasian weed that has now spread  throughout the Northern Hemisphere. They’re notorious for their stinging hairs,  which have a brittle silicate tip and a gland that supplies a cocktail of irritant  chemicals, including histamine, for injection when skin meets needle. The hairs can  be disarmed by a quick blanch in boiling water, which releases and dilutes the  chemicals. But the harvest and washing require protective gloves. Nettles are  made into soup, stewed, and mixed with cheese to stuff pasta.  Purslane   Purslane ( Portulaca oleracea ) is a low-lying weed with fat stems and small  thick leaves, which thrives in midsummer heat on neglected ground. It’s a  European native that has spread throughout the world. One nickname for purslane  is pig-weed, and the 19th century Englishman William Cobbett said it was suitable  only for pigs and the French. But people in many countries enjoy its combination  of tartness and soothing, mucilaginous smoothness, both raw in salads and added  to meat and vegetable dishes during the last few minutes of cooking. There are  now cultivated varieties with larger leaves shaded yellow and pink. Its qualities are  similar to those of the cactus pad because both have adapted in similar ways to  hot, dry habitats (p. 316). Purslane is notable for its content of calcium, several  vitamins, and an omega-3 fatty acid, linolenic acid (p. 801).  Flowers: Artichokes, Broccoli, Cauliflower, and Others  Flowers As Foods  Flowers are plant organs that attract pollinating animals with a strong scent, bright  colors, or both; so they can add both aromatic and visual appeal to our foods. But  the most important edible flowers in the West are neither colorful nor flowery!  Broccoli   and   cauliflower   are   immature   or   developmentally   arrested   flower  structures, and artichokes are eaten before they have a chance to open. Aromatic  flowers have played a more prominent role in the Middle East and Asia. In the  Middle East, the distilled essence of indigenous roses, and later of bitter orange  flowers from China, has long been used to embellish the flavors of many dishes,  rosewater in baklava and “Turkish delight,” for example, and orange-flower water in  Moroccan salads and stews and in Turkish coffee. Food historian Charles Perry has  called these extracts “the vanilla of the Middle East.” They were commonly used in  the West as well until vanilla displaced them in the middle of the 19th century.
Many flowers can be and are used as edible garnishes, or cooked into aromatic  fritters, or infused to make a tea or sorbet. The petals are the main source of  volatile chemicals, which are held in surface cells or specialized oil glands. Both the  petals and their flavors are delicate, so they should be cooked very briefly or added  at the last minute. Flower petals are candied by brief cooking in a strong sugar  syrup, or by brushing them gently with egg white or a solution of gum arabic,  dusting them with sugar, and allowing them to dry. In the second technique, the  egg white provides both antimicrobial proteins (p. 77) and a sticky liquid for the  sugar to dissolve into, and the concentrated sugar pulls water out of any surviving  microbes. When working with flowers, the cook should observe two cautions:  avoid flowers that are known to contain defensive plant toxins, or that may have  been treated with pesticides or fungicides in the greenhouse or garden.  Banana Flowers   Banana flowers are the large male portion of the tropical banana  tree’s flower and its protective layers. They’re somewhat astringent from the  presence of tannins, and are cooked as a vegetable.  Daylily Buds   Daylily buds, mostly from species of   Hemerocallis,   are eaten both  fresh and dried in Asia — the dried form is sometimes called “golden needles” —  and provide a valuable supplement of carotenoid and phenolic antioxidants.  Roselle, Hibiscus, and Jamaica   These are all names for the bright red, tart,  aromatic fleshy flower covering (the   calyx,   more familiar as the leaf-like stubs at the  base of a strawberry) of a kind of hibiscus.   Hibiscus sabdariffa   is a native of Africa  and a relative of okra. It’s much used in Mexico and the Caribbean, sometimes  fresh, sometimes dried and infused to make drinks, sometimes rehydrated and  cooked with other ingredients. In the United States it’s most familiar as an  ingredient in Hawaiian punch and many red herbal teas (the pigments are  anthocyanins). Jamaica (“ha-MY-ka”) is remarkable for being a concentrated source  of vitamin C, phenolic antioxidants, and gel-forming pectin.  Squash Blossoms   The large flowers of zucchini and its relatives (p. 332) are  sometimes stuffed, and variously deep-fried or chopped and added to soups or  egg dishes. Their aroma is musky and complex, with green, almond, spicy, violet,  and barnyard notes.
Some Edible and Inedible Flowers  Edible Flowers   Inedible Flowers  Herbs (chive, rosemary, lavender)  Rose  Violet, pansy  Daylily  Begonia  Jasmine  Geranium (many herb and fruit  scents)  Lilac  Orchids  Chrysanthemum, marigold  Lotus  Nasturtium  Elderflower  Citrus  Apple, pear  Tulip  Gardenia  Peony  Linden ( tilleul)  Redbud  Lily of the valley  Hydrangea  Narcissus, daffodil  Oleander  Poinsettia  Rhododendron  Sweet pea  Wisteria  Artichokes  The artichoke is the large flower bud of a kind of thistle,   Cynara scolymus,   native to  the Mediterranean region. It was probably developed from the cardoon,   C.  cardunculus,   which has small and meager buds whose base and stem were eaten  in ancient Greece. Artichokes were a delicacy in Rome, a fact of which Pliny  professed   to   be   ashamed: “thus   we   turn   into   a   corrupt   feast   the   earth’s  monstrosities, those which even the animals instinctively avoid” (Book19). The
name is a corruption, via Italian, of the Arabic   al’ qarshuf,   meaning “little cardoon”;  food historian Charles Perry suggests that the large buds we know today, several  inches in diameter, were developed in the late Middle Ages in Moorish Spain.  Thistles are members of the lettuce family and so relatives of salsify and sun-  chokes, all of which share a similar flavor. The edible parts of the artichoke are the  fleshy bases of the bracts, or protective leaves, and the heart, which is actually the  base of the flower structure, the upper part of the stalk. The “choke” is made up of  the actual flowerets, which if allowed to bloom turn a deep violet-blue. The small  artichokes sometimes seen in markets or in jars come from flowering stalks low on  the plant rather than the main stalk. They grow very slowly, and so are picked at an  immature stage when there’s little or no choke inside.  The artichoke. The “heart” is the flower base and corresponds to the fleshy portion of  the strawberry and fig.  The qualities of the artichoke are largely determined by its copious content of  phenolic substances, which manifest themselves immediately when the flesh is cut  or tasted raw. Cut surfaces turn brown very quickly as the phenolics react with  oxygen to form colored complexes, and raw slices are noticeably astringent thanks  to the reaction of phenolics with our salivary proteins. Cooking minimizes both  effects. By disrupting the cells, it causes the phenolics to bind to a host of different  molecules including each other; this gives the flesh an evenly dark tone, and leaves  few   phenolics   free   to   cause   astringency.   Some   artichoke   phenolics   have  antioxidant and cholesterol-lowering effects, and one in particular, a compound  dubbed cynarin, has the unusual effect of making foods eaten after a bite of
artichoke taste sweet. Cynarin apparently inhibits the sweet receptors on our taste  buds, so when it’s swept off the tongue by the next bite, the receptors start up  again, and we notice the contrast. Because they therefore distort the flavor of  other foods, artichokes are thought to be an inappropriate accompaniment to fine  wines.  The Cabbage Family: Broccoli, Cauliflower, Romanesco  These vegetables are all varieties of cabbage in which the normal development of  flower stalks and flowers is arrested, so that the immature flowering tissues  proliferate and accumulate into large masses. Based on recent genetic and  geographic analysis, it appears that broccoli arose in Italy and in turn gave rise to  cauliflower, which was known in Europe by the 16th century.  In the case of broccoli, extra flower-stalk tissue develops, fuses into thick “spears,”  and then goes on to produce clusters of small green flower buds. In cauliflower  and its interestingly angular, green variant, romanesco, the stalk-production stage  is extended indefinitely and forms a dense mass or “curd” of immature flowerstalk  branches. Because the curd is developmentally immature, it remains relatively  unfibrous and rich in cell-wall pectins and hemicelluloses (p. 265), and so can be  pureed to a very fine, creamy consistency (and if overcooked whole, it readily turns  to mush). To get as white a cauliflower curd as possible, growers usually tie the  leaves over it to protect it from sunlight, which induces the production of yellowish  pigments.  Broccoli rabe, slender stalks topped with a small cluster of flower buds, is unrelated  to true broccoli. The name is a corruption of “broccoletti di rape,” or “little sprouts of  turnip,” and refers to a variety of turnip that bears somewhat thickened flower  stalks along its main stalk. Broccoli rabe is notably more bitter than true broccoli.  Broccolini, similar to broccoli rabe but less bitter, is a recent hybrid between  European and Asian brassicas.  Fruits Used as Vegetables  The botanical fruits that cooks treat as vegetables generally require cooking to  make them interesting or soft enough to eat. The two familiar exceptions to this  rule are tomatoes and cucumbers, frequently served raw in salads.
The Nightshade Family: Tomato, Capsicums, Eggplant, and  Others  This   remarkable   plant   family   includes   several   of   the   world’s   most   popular  vegetables as well as tobacco and deadly nightshade; in fact it was the tomato’s  resemblance to nightshade that slowed its acceptance in Europe. Members of the  nightshade family share the habit of stock-piling chemical defenses, usually bitter  alkaloids.   Many   generations   of   selection   and   breeding   have   reduced   these  defenses in most edible nightshade fruits, though their leaves are often still toxic.  There’s one nightshade defense that humans have fallen in love with: the pungent  capsaicins of the chilli “peppers.” Chillis are the most popular spice in the world;  their pungency is discussed in chapter 8. In this section I’ll describe the milder  capsicums that are eaten as vegetables.  Vegetables in the Nightshade Family  Potato   Solanum tuberosum  Eggplant   Solanum melongena; S. aethiopicum,  macrocarpon  Tomato   Lycopersicon esculentum  Capsicums, chillis   Capsicum   species  Bell, pimiento, paprika, jalapeño,  serrano, poblano…  C. annuum  Tabasco   C. frutescens  Scotch bonnet, habanero   C. chinense  Aji   C. baccatum  Manzano   C. pubescens  Tomatillo   Physalis ixocarpa, P. philadelphica  Tree tomato   Cyphomandra betacea  Tomatoes   Tomatoes started out as small, bitter berries growing on bushes in the
west coast deserts of South America. Today, after their domestication in Mexico  (their name comes from the Aztec term for “plump fruit,”   tomatl ), and a period of  European suspicion that lasted into the 19th century, they’re eaten all over the  world in a great variety of sizes, shapes, and carotenoid-painted colors. In the  United States they’re second in vegetable popularity only to the potato, a starchy  staple.  What accounts for their great appeal? And why are these sweet-tart fruits treated  as a vegetable? I think that the answers lie in their unique flavor. In addition to a  relatively low sugar content for a fruit (3%), similar to that of cabbage and brussels  sprouts, ripe tomatoes have an unusually large amount of savory glutamic acid (as  much as 0.3% of their weight), as well as aromatic sulfur compounds. Glutamic acid  and sulfur aromas are more common in meats than fruits, and so predispose them  to complement the flavor of meats, even to replace that flavor, and certainly to add  depth and complexity to sauces and other mixed preparations. (This may also be  why although many rotten fruits smell pleasantly fermented, rotten tomatoes are  absolutely foul!) In any case, tomatoes are a good thing to like. They’re rich in  vitamin C, and the standard red varieties give us an excellent dose of the  antioxidant carotenoid lycopene, which is especially concentrated in tomato paste  and ketchup.  Tomato Anatomy and Flavor   Aside from the relatively dry paste varieties, most  tomatoes have four different kinds of tissue: a thin, tough cuticle, or skin, which is  sometimes removed; the outer fruit wall; the central pith; and a semiliquid jelly and  juice surrounding the seeds. The wall tissue contains most of the sugars and amino  acids, while the concentration of acid in the jelly and juice is double that of the  wall. And most of the aroma compounds are found in the cuticle and wall. The  flavor of a tomato slice thus depends on the relative proportions of these tissues.  Many cooks prepare tomatoes for cooking by first removing the skin, seedy jelly,  and juice. This practice makes the tomato flesh more refined and less watery, but it  changes the flavor balance in favor of sweetness, and sacrifices aroma. The  tomato’s citric and malic acids aren’t volatile and don’t cook away, so acidity and  some aroma can be restored by cooking the skins, jelly, and juice together until  much of the liquid has evaporated, then straining the remainder into the cooking  tomato flesh. As cooks have long known and flavor chemists have verified, the  overall flavor of tomatoes can be intensified by the addition of both sugar and  acidity.
Tomato anatomy. The fruit wall is especially rich in sugars, amino acids, and aroma  molecules, the jelly in sugarbalancing acids.  Tomatoes that are allowed to ripen fully on the vine accumulate more sugar, acid,  and aroma compounds, and have the fullest flavor. An important element of ripe-  tomato flavor is provided by the aroma compound furaneol, which resembles  sweet-savory caramel (it also contributes to the flavors of ripe strawberries and  pineapples). Most supermarket tomatoes are picked and shipped while still green  and artificially stimulated to redden by treatment with ethylene gas (p. 351), so  they have little ripe-fruit flavor, and in fact have become a byword for flavorless  produce. However, parts of Europe and Latin America prefer to make salads with  less fruity, more vegetable-like mature green tomatoes, and people in many  regions cook (or pickle) and enjoy green tomatoes for their own kind of savoriness.  And in rural Peru, the prized varieties of both tomato and tomatillo are frankly  bitter.  Cooked Tomatoes   When fresh tomatoes are cooked down to make a thick sauce,  they gain some flavors — notably rose-and violet-like fragments of the carotenoid  pigments — but they lose the fresh “green” notes provided by unstable fragments  of fatty acids and by a particular sulfur compound (a thiazole). Because tomato  leaves have a pronounced fresh-tomato aroma thanks to their leaf enzymes (p.  273) and prominent aromatic oil glands, some cooks add a few leaves to a tomato  sauce toward the end of the cooking, to restore its fresh notes. Tomato leaves have  long been considered potentially toxic because they contain a defensive alkaloid,  tomatine, but recent research has found that tomatine binds tightly to cholesterol  molecules in our digestive system, so that the body absorbs neither the alkaloid  nor its bound partner. It thus reduces our net intake of cholesterol! (Green  tomatoes also contain tomatine and have the same effect.) It’s fine, then, to
freshen the flavor of tomato sauces with the leaves.  Fresh tomatoes readily cook down to a smooth puree, but many canned tomatoes  don’t. Canners frequently add calcium salts to firm the cell walls and keep the  pieces intact, and this can interfere with their disintegration during cooking. If you  want to make a fine-textured dish from canned tomatoes, check the labels and buy  a brand that doesn’t list calcium among its ingredients.  Storage   Tomatoes came originally from a warm climate, and should be stored at  room temperature. Their fresh flavor readily suffers from refrigeration. Tomatoes at  the mature-green stage are especially sensitive to chilling at temperatures below  about 55ºF/13ºC, and suffer damage to their membranes that results in minimal  flavor development, blotchy coloration, and a soft, mealy texture when they’re  brought back to room temperature. Fully ripe tomatoes are less sensitive, but lose  flavor due to the loss of flavor-producing enzyme activity. Some of this activity can  come back, so refrigerated tomatoes should be allowed to recover at room  temperature for a day or two before eating.  The “tree tomato” is the vaguely tomato-like fruit of a woody plant in the  nightshade family. It comes in red and yellow types and has a tough peel and  bland flavor.  Tomatillos   Tomatillos are the fruits of   Physalis ixocarpa,   a tomato relative that in  fact was cultivated before the tomato in Mexico and Guatemala, to whose cool  highlands it is better adapted. The tomatillo fruit is smaller than a standard tomato  but similar in structure, and is borne on the plant enclosed in a papery husk. Its  skin is thick and tough, sticky with a water-soluble secretion (the plant’s species  name,   ixocarpa,   means “sticky fruit”), that helps it keep well for several weeks. The  tomatillo remains green when ripe and has a tart but otherwise mild, green flavor,  a relatively firm and dry texture. It’s usually cooked and/or pureed into sauces, with  other   ingredients   adding   depth   or   strength   of   flavor.   A   related   species,   P.  philadelphica,   provides an esteemed purple version called   miltomate.  Capsicums or Sweet Peppers   Capsicums, like tomatoes, are fruits of the New  World that conquered the Old. They were domesticated in South America, and are  now a defining element of the cuisines of Mexico, Spain, Hungary, and many  countries in Asia (the countries with the highest per capita consumption are  Mexico and Korea). This triumph is due largely to the defensive chemical capsaicin,  which activates pain and heat receptors in our mouths, and which many human
cultures have perversely come to love. This spicy aspect of the chillis is what  inspired Columbus to call them peppers, though they’re not at all related to true  black pepper. ( Chilli   was the Aztec term.) For chillis as spices, see chapter 8.  Capsicums are essentially hollow berries, with a relatively thin, crisp wall of storage  cells (spice types have been selected for very thin, easily dried fruits; vegetable  types such as the pimiento have been bred for meatier walls). There are five  domesticated species in the chilli genus   Capsicum,   with most vegetable types  coming from   C. annuum.   Many varieties have been developed that are mild  enough to be eaten as vegetables rather than condiments, and with a range of  colors, shapes, sweetnesses, and aromas. Capsicums ripen to shades of yellow,  brown, purple, or red, depending on the mix of pigments (purple comes from  anthocyanins,   brown   from   the   combination   of   red   carotenoids   and   green  chlorophyll), but all can be picked and eaten green. The familiar green bell pepper  has   a   strong,   distinctive   aroma   thanks   to   a   particular   compound   (isobutyl  methoxypyrazine) carried in oil droplets within its cells; the very same compound  occasionally pops up in cabernet sauvignon and sauvignon blanc wines and gives  them a usually unwelcome green-vegetable note. Green fruits and mature yellow  varieties are also rich in the carotenoid lutein, which helps prevent oxidative  damage in the eye (p. 256). In red varieties, both lutein and the green aroma  disappear during ripening along with chlorophyll, and other carotenoid pigments  accumulate, the main ones being capsanthin, capsorubin, as well as beta-carotene,  the   precursor   of   vitamin   A.   Mature   red   capsicums   are   among   the   richest  carotenoid sources we have; paprika powder may be more than 1% pigment by  weight. They’re also rich in vitamin C. And thanks to their content of cell-wall  pectins, both fresh and rehydrated dried capsicums develop a thick, smooth  consistency when cooked and pureed for a soup or sauce.  Eggplants,   or   Aubergines   Eggplants   are   the   only   major   vegetable   in   the  nightshade family that came from the Old World. An early ancestor may have  floated from Africa to India or Southeast Asia, where it was domesticated, and  where small, bitter varieties are still appreciated as a condiment. Arab traders  brought it to Spain and north Africa in the Middle Ages, and it was eaten in Italy in  the 15th century, in France by the 18th. (The etymology of   aubergine   mirrors this  history; it comes via Spanish and Arabic from the Sanskrit name.) Thanks to its  tropical origins, the eggplant doesn’t keep well in the refrigerator; internal chilling  damage leads to browning and off-flavors in a few days.
There are many varieties of eggplant, white-and orange-and purple-skinned, pea-  and cucumber-and melon-sized, very mild and intensely bitter. Most market types  are colored with purple anthocyanins, while a different species ( S. aethiopicum )  provides the orange carotenoid types. All eggplants have a spongy interior, with  many tiny air pockets between cells. When cooked, the air pockets collapse and  the flesh consolidates into a fine-textured mass, sometimes creamy (most Asian  varieties) and sometimes meaty (most European varieties) depending on the  variety, maturity, and preparation. In baked casseroles — the Greek moussaka and  Italian eggplant parmigiana — eggplant slices retain some structure; in the Middle  Eastern dip baba ghanoush, grilled pureed eggplant provides the smooth, melting  body that carries the flavors of sesame paste, lemon juice, and garlic.  Eggplant’s spongy structure has two notable consequences for the cook. One is  that eggplants shrink down to a relatively small volume when cooked. The other is  that when fried, raw eggplant pieces soak up oil, leaving little on the pan for  lubrication and making the vegetable very rich. In some preparations — such as  the famous Arab dish   Imam bayaldi,   “the priest fainted,” in which halved eggplants  are stuffed and baked in copious olive oil — this richness is desired and  maximized.   Otherwise,   the   absorptiveness   of   eggplant   can   be   reduced   by  collapsing its spongy structure before frying. This is accomplished by precooking it  — microwaving works well — or by salting slices to draw out moisture from the  cells and into the air pockets. Salting is often recommended as a way to remove  the bitterness sometimes found in older eggplants grown in dry conditions, but it  probably just reduces our perception of the alkaloids (p. 640); the bulk of the cell  fluids remains in the cells.  The Squash and Cucumber Family  The   squash   or   cucurbit   family,   the   Cucurbitaceae,   has   made   three   broad  contributions to human pleasure and nutrition. These are the sweet, moist melons  described in the next chapter, the sweet, starchy, nutritious “winter” squashes,  which are harvested fully mature and hard and keep for months, and the not-so-  sweet, moist cucumber and “summer” squashes, which are harvested while  immature and tender, and keep for a few weeks. (“Squash” comes from a  Narragansett Indian word meaning “a green thing eaten raw.”) When cooked,  winter squashes develop a consistency and flavor something like those of a sweet  potato, while the summer squashes and immature Asian gourds develop a mild
but distinctive aroma and a translucent, slick, almost gelatinous texture. Fruits of  Cucurbita maxima,   the Hubbard and other winter squashes, can reach 300 lb/135  kg, and are the largest fruits of any plant. Most cucurbits produce a particular form  of berry called a pepo, with a protective rind and a mass of storage tissue  containing many seeds. All of them are native to warm climates, so they suffer from  chill injury if stored at standard refrigerator temperatures. In addition to the flesh  of their fruits, cucurbits also offer edible vines, flowers, and seeds.  The Squash Family  Asian and African Species  Cucumber   Cucumis sativus  Gherkin   Cucumis anguria  Melons: cantaloupe, honeydew, etc.   Cucumis melo  Watermelon   Citrullus lanatus  Winter/fuzzy melon, wax gourd   Benincasa hispida  Luffa, ridged gourd   Luffa acutangula  Bottle gourd, cucuzza, calabash   Lagenaria siceraria  Bitter gourd, bitter melon   Momordica  charantia  South and North American Species  Summer and acorn squash, zucchini, pumpkin,  spaghetti squash  Cucurbita pepo  Winter squash: butternut, cheese, kabocha   Cucurbita  moschata  Winter squash: Hubbard, turban, banana, kabocha   Cucurbita maxima  Cushaw   Cucurbita mixta  Chayote, mirliton   Sechium edule  Winter Squashes   Winter squashes were domesticated in the Americas beginning
around 5000   BCE . They are both nutritious — many are rich in beta-carotene and  other carotenoids as well as starch — and versatile. The flesh of most varieties is  firm enough to sauté or stew in chunks (fibrous spaghetti squash is an exception),  but once cooked it also can be pureed to a very fine consistency; and its moderate  sweetness makes it suitable for both savory and sweet preparations, from soups or  side dishes to pies and custards. Their tough, dry skin and hollow structure  encourage their use as edible containers; they can be filled with sweet or savory  liquids, then baked, and eaten along with their contents. Winter squashes can be  stored for months and many are available year-round, but they’re at their prime  shortly after harvest in late fall. They keep best at a temperature around 55ºF/15ºC  and in relatively dry conditions (50–70% relative humidity).  Summer Squashes   Summer squashes have been bred into a delightful variety of  shapes. There are scallops or pattypans, flat and scalloped around the edges;  crooknecks and straight necks, with constricted stem ends; elongated vegetable  marrows, or zucchinis; acorn squash; and distinctive Middle Eastern and Asian  types as well. Some are green-skinned, some vibrantly yellow with carotenoid  pigments, some variegated, and all have a pale, delicately spongy flesh that  softens quickly when cooked. They’re sweetest when picked young, and keep for a  few weeks at 45–50ºF/7–10ºC.  Cucumbers   The cucumber was domesticated in India around 1500   BCE , arrived in  the Mediterranean region about a thousand years later, and is now the second  most important cucurbit worldwide after the watermelon. Like the watermelon,  cucumbers are notable for their crisp, moist, mild, refreshing character. They’re  mainly consumed raw or pickled, and sometimes juiced to make a delicately  flavored liquid for use in salad dressings, poaching fish, and other procedures. The  distinctive yet melon-like aroma of cucumbers develops when the flesh is cut or  chewed, and comes from the action of enzymes that break long membrane fatty-  acid molecules into smaller chains that are 9 carbon atoms long; the characteristic  melon fragments are alcohols, the cucumber fragments aldehydes. The larger a  cucumber grows, the lower its acidity and the higher its modest sugar content (1–  2%).  Cucumber Types   There are five broad groups of cucumber varieties. Middle  Eastern and Asian types are relatively small and thin. American pickling varieties  are either smaller or slower-growing than “slicing” varieties, and have a thin skin to  ease the penetration of brine. The standard American slicing cucumbers have been
bred for the rigors of field production and long-distance distribution. They tend to  be short and thick, with a relatively tough skin, dry flesh, prominent seeds, a strong  cucumber flavor, and some bitterness at the stem end and just under the skin,  thanks to the presence of defensive chemicals called cucurbitacins that discourage  pests. European varieties, which are mainly grown in the controlled environment  of greenhouses, are typically long and slender, with a thin tender skin, moist flesh,  unformed seeds due to an absence of pollinating insects, a milder cucumber flavor,  and   no   bitterness   (breeders   have   eliminated   the   cucurbitacins).   American  cucumbers are often waxed to slow moisture loss, and so are almost always peeled  before use, while European varieties are wrapped in plastic to accomplish the same  purpose without compromising the edibility of their skin.  So-called “Armenian cucumbers” are actually an elongated African melon. True  gherkins are the abundant prickly fruits, round and about 1 in/2 cm long, of yet  another African relative.  Bitter Gourds   Bitter gourds have long been prized in Asia for a trait that’s  considered a defect in cucumbers, the presence of bitter cucurbitacins. There may  be good reasons to cultivate a taste for cucurbitacins, because recent studies have  found that they may help slow the development of cancers. Bitter gourds are pale  green, with an irregular, warty surface. They’re usually eaten while immature,  sometimes   after   an   initial   blanching   to   remove   some   of   the   water-soluble  cucurbitacins, and are either stuffed or combined with other ingredients, which  moderate the bitterness. Mature fruits contain a red, sticky, sweet material that  covers the seeds and is sometimes eaten.  Bottle Gourds   Bottle gourds or calabashes are most often allowed to mature and  then dried to make containers and ornaments. Italians call the immature fruits  cucuzze,   and peel and cook them to produce a relatively bland version of a summer  squash.  Luffa or Angled Gourds   Luffa gourds, sometimes called Chinese okra, are  elongated fruits with prominent ridges, and a mild taste and delicate texture when  eaten immature. (A different species is used to make fibrous luffa “sponges”; true  sponges are sea creatures.)  Winter or Wax or Fuzzy Melons   Winter melons accumulate enough protective  wax on their rinds that it can be scraped off and made into candles. On young  fruits the wax-producing glands are more prominent than the wax itself, so they
are known as hairy or fuzzy gourds or melons. These are cooked like summer  squash, and their flesh becomes almost translucent. Winter melons keep well, and  in Chinese cooking are used as an edible container for a festive soup.  Chayote or Mirliton   Chayote is the squash that seems least like a squash. It’s the  fruit of a Central American vine, and looks something like a large pear some 5–8  in/12–20 cm long, with a single large seed at the center. Its flesh is finer-textured  than the flesh of summer squashes, takes longer to cook, but is otherwise similar in  its mild aroma and moist texture. The seed cavity is sometimes stuffed, and the  seed sometimes eaten.  The Bean Family: Fresh Beans and Peas  Unlike most edible fruits, the fruits of the bean family were not designed to appeal  to seed-dispersing animals. This group of plants is often called the   legumes,  “legume” being the name for their particular kind of fruit, a thin-walled pod, dry  and brittle when mature, that encloses several seeds and disperses them by  popping open when they’re disturbed. It’s in their dry form that we harvest most  legume crops, since they can be stored indefinitely and are a concentrated source  of nourishment (see chapter 9). Green beans and peas are immature pods and/or  seeds, harvested before they begin to dry out, and are both very ancient and very  recent foods. Early humans likely first ate the green pods and seeds, since dried  seeds required cooking. However, the dried forms were so much more useful that  varieties   with   pods   specialized   for   eating   green   —   with   no   tough   inner  “parchment” layer and reduced fiber throughout — have only been bred for a few  hundred years.  Green legume seeds are tasty and nourishing because they’re collecting sugars,  amino acids, and other nutrients from the rest of the plant, but haven’t yet packed  them all into compact and tasteless starch and proteins. The green pods are tasty  and nourishing because they serve as a temporary storage depot for the seeds’  supplies. The pods also generate their own sugars by photosynthesis, making use  of carbon dioxide that its enclosed seeds give off as they grow. After they’re  harvested, the green pods continue to send sugars to the seeds, so they lose their  sweetness. We eat the green seeds of many legumes, notably lima beans, fava  beans, and soybeans (chapter9), but the pods of only a few: the common bean,  long bean, and pea.
Green Beans   Green beans come from a climbing plant native to Central America  and the Andes region of northern South America. Though the peoples who  domesticated   them   have   probably   always   eaten   some   immature   pods,   the  breeding of specialized vegetable bean varieties is less than 200 years old. There  are   now   chlorophyll-free,   yellowish “wax” varieties,   and   purple,   chlorophyll-  masking anthocyanin varieties that turn green when cooked (p. 281). The fibrous  “strings” that normally join the two walls of the pod and are stripped away with the  stem during preparation — hence the name “string beans” — were eliminated by a  New York breeder in the late 19th century; these days only heirloom varieties tend  to have strings. There are two general forms of green bean, one with round and  thin pods, the other with flat and broad pods. Flat varieties have been found to  have a more intense flavor. The flavor of cooked green beans is interestingly  complex; it includes a number of sulfur and “green” compounds, but also the  essence of fresh mushroom (octenol) and a flowery terpene (linalool).  Good-quality green beans can be hard to find, because they’re one of the most  fragile vegetables. Their tissue is very active, so they quickly consume their sugars  and lose sweetness even in cold storage. And thanks to their subtropical origins,  they don’t keep well at refrigerator temperatures; their cells become damaged and  lose chlorophyll. Once they’re picked, tender low-fiber varieties quickly become  wrinkled and limp as they lose moisture and sugars. Commercial varieties have  been bred with more fiber to help them survive shipping and marketing with a  better shape.  Long or Yard-Long Beans   Long beans, sometimes called asparagus beans, do  sometimes reach a yard/meter in length. They’re the thin, small-seeded pods of a  subspecies of black-eyed pea, a native of Africa that was taken to Asia more than  2,000 years ago. Asian cultures already had a number of excellent seed legumes  but no warm-climate vegetable legume, and it was India or China that developed  the yard-long version of the black-eyed pea. These beans have a higher fiber  content than common green beans and therefore a drier, firmer texture when  cooked. They’re also sensitive to chilling (they keep best in the cold but deteriorate  quickly if then left at room temperature).  Peas   Peas come from a climbing plant native to the Mediterranean area, and are  eaten immature both in the pods and as shelled green seeds (their tender shoots,  stems, and leaves are also popular vegetables in Asia). Vegetable varieties of pea  were first developed in the 17th century, beginning in Holland and then in
England, and for a long time they remained luxury foods. There are several  different types of pod peas, including the traditional English or European, round  and thin-walled, the very recent “sugar snap” pea, round and thick-walled and  quite crunchy, and “snow” or Asian peas, flat and broad, thin-walled, with small  seeds. Peas and green capsicum “bell peppers” contain similar and very potent  “green” aroma compounds (isobutyl methoxypyrazines).  Some Vegetable Beans and Their Origins  Green bean   Phaseolus vulgaris   Central  America  Lima bean   Phaseolus lunatus   South  America  Green peas, sugar peas, snow peas,  pea shoots  Pisum sativum   Western Asia  Fava bean   Vicia faba   Western Asia  Long bean   Vigna unguiculata   Africa  Soybean   Glycine max   East Asia  Winged, asparagus bean   Tetragonolobus  purpureus  Africa  Other Fruits Used as Vegetables  Avocado   The avocado tree   Persea americana   is a native of Central America and a  member of the laurel family, a relative of the bay laurel, California bay, and  sassafras. Like its relatives, it has aromatic leaves that are used as flavorings (p. 408).  Avocado fruits are remarkable for containing little or no sugar or starch, and for  being as much as 30% oil, the equivalent of well-marbled meat (but marbled with  olive oil; avocado oil is largely monounsaturated). They apparently evolved to  appeal to large animals with a high calorie requirement. The name comes from the  Nahuatl word   ahuacatl,   which was apparently inspired by the fruit’s pear-like shape
and irregular surface; it means “testicle.”  There are three geographical groups of avocado. The Mexican group evolved in  relatively cool subtropical highlands, so the trees are the most cold-tolerant; they  produce small and smooth-fleshed fruit that are high in oil and can take relatively  low storage temperatures, around 40ºF/4ºC. The lowland group evolved on the  semitropical west coast of Guatemala and are the least cold-tolerant; their fruits  tend to be large and coarse-fleshed and suffer chilling injury below about  54ºF/12ºC.   And   the   Guatemalan   group,   from   the   semitropical   highlands,   is  intermediate in most respects; the flesh of its fruits is least fibrous and the  proportion of seed the lowest. In the United States, where most avocados are  grown in southern California, commercial varieties are of mixed background. The  most common variety, and one of the best, is the black, pebbly-skinned Hass,  which is mainly Guatemalan. The smooth, green-skinned Fuerte, Pinkerton, and  Reed are also relatively rich, while green Bacon and Zutano, and Florida’s Booth  and Lula, have more lowland ancestry, tend to remain firm, and have half or less  the fat content of the Hass avocado.  Avocados don’t begin to ripen until after they’ve been picked, so they’re stored on  the tree. All types ripen from the broad end toward the stem within about a week  of harvest, and develop the best quality at temperatures between 60–75ºF/15–  24ºC. Ripening can be accelerated by enclosing the fruit in a paper bag with an  ethylene-emitting banana. If these warm-climate fruits are refrigerated while  unripe, their cellular machinery is damaged and they will never ripen; once ripe,  however, they can be refrigerated for several days and retain their quality. The  aroma of avocado comes mainly from a group of mildly spicy terpenes including  woody caryophyllene, as well as unusual 10-and 7-carbon fragments of fatty acids.  The flesh of rich avocado varieties readily turns into an unctuous puree without  the necessity of any cooking, while leaner varieties retain some crispness and hold  up well in sliced form for salads. Avocado flesh is well known for browning rapidly  once cut or mashed (p. 269), a problem that can be remedied by adding an acidic  ingredient (often lime juice) or by airtight wrapping with a plastic film that blocks  oxygen effectively (polyvinylidene chloride, alias saran, is far more effective than  polyethylene or PVC). In the case of mashed avocado, this means pressing the  wrap directly into the surface. Though not usually cooked — heat generates a  bitter compound and brings out an odd, eggy quality — avocados are sometimes  added at the last minute to thicken and flavor soups, sauces, and stews.
Sweet Corn   The corn that we eat as a vegetable is a fresh version of the same grain  that gives us dry, starchy popcorn and cornmeal (chapter 9). Each individual grain  on an ear of corn is a miniature fruit that’s mainly seed, a combination of a small  embryonic plant and its relatively large food supply of storage proteins and starch.  We eat fresh corn about three weeks after pollination, while the fruits are  immature, their storage tissues still sweet and juicy. Corn owes its typical yellow  color to carotenoid pigments, including zeaxanthin (which derives its name from  corn,   Zea mays,   and is one of the two main eye-protecting antioxidants). There are  also white varieties with low carotenoid levels, as well as anthocyanin-colored red  and blue varieties, and green ones too.  Fresh Corn Carbohydrates and Qualities   Fresh corn contains three different forms  of carbohydrate that contribute different qualities, and that are present in different  proportions depending on the variety. The corn plant produces sugars and sends  them to the seed, where they are temporarily held as is and impart sweetness until  the cells string them together into large storage molecules. Very large sugar chains  get packed into starch granules, which have no taste and lend a chalky texture to  uncooked corn. Then there are medium-sized, tasteless sugar aggregates called  “water-soluble   polysaccharides,” which   have   many   short   branches   of   sugar  molecules. These bushy structures are small enough to float in dissolved form in  the cell fluids, yet large enough that they bind up a lot of water molecules and get  in each other’s way, and thus thicken the fluid to a creamy, smooth consistency.  Traditional sweet corns derived from a genetic trait that arose in the cultivated  fields of pre-Columbian South America, and that reduced starch levels in the  maturing fruits while raising both sugar and soluble polysaccharide levels. The  fresh kernels were thus sweeter and creamier than standard corns. In the early  1960s, breeders in the United States released new “super-sweet” varieties, with  very high sugar levels, little starch, but also fewer soluble polysaccharides: so their  kernel fluids are less creamy and more watery (see box). Super-sweet varieties have  the advantage of losing less sweetness during shipping and storage — in three  days, traditional sweet corn converts half of its sweet sugar into tasteless chains —  but some corn lovers consider them too sweet, their flavor one-dimensional.
Carbohydrates and the Qualities of Fresh Corn  This table gives the proportions in different corns of the carbohydrates that  make cooked fresh corn taste sweet and feel creamy or dry in the mouth. The  figures are percentages of the corn’s fresh weight, when harvested 18–21 days  after pollination.  Sugars  (sweetness)  Water-soluble  polysaccharides  (creaminess)  Starch  (dryness)  Standard corn   6   3   66  Sweet corn   16   23   28  Supersweet  corn  40   5   20  Source: A. R. Hallauer, ed.,   Specialty Corns.   2nd ed. (2001).  Preparing Corn   While we usually prepare and consume the kernels whole, most of  the flavor comes from the inner tissues, so some cooks grate, blend, or juice the  raw kernels and separate the fluids from the seed coats, which get increasingly  thick and tough with age. Because the fluids contain some starch, they will thicken  like a sauce if heated above about 150ºF/65ºC. Heating also intensifies the  characteristic aroma of corn, which is largely due to dimethyl and hydrogen  sulfides and other sulfur volatiles (methane-and ethanethiols). Dimethyl sulfide is  also prominent in the aroma of cooked milk and molluscs, which is one reason why  corn works so well in chowders. Sweet corn is also dried, which gives it a toasted,  light caramel note. The hard, inedible support structure called the cob can lend  flavor to vegetable stocks; that flavor is nuttier if the cob is first browned in the  oven.  Baby Corn   Miniature or “baby” corn consists of immature, unpollinated ears from  full-sized corn varieties, picked two to four days after the silks emerge from the ear,  when the cob is still edible, crisp, and sweet. (The rest of the plant becomes animal  feed.) The ear may be 2–4 in/5–10 cm long and contains 2–3% sugar. Miniature  corn production was developed in Taiwan and advanced in Thailand; Central
America has recently become a major source.  Okra   Okra comes from the annual plant   Hibiscus (Abelmoschus) esculentus,   a  member of the hibiscus family, and a relative of roselle (p. 327) and cotton. It  originated in either southwest Asia or eastern Africa, and came to the southern  United States with the slave trade. The portion that we eat is the immature  seedpod or capsule, with its distinctive five-cornered shape, starlike in cross  section, and its notoriously slimy mucilage. Plant mucilage is a complex mixture of  long, entangled carbohydrate molecules and proteins that helps plants and their  seeds retain water. (Cactus and purslane are similarly slimy; the seeds of basil,  fenugreek,   and   flax   exude   water-trapping   mucilage   when   soaked,   and   are  therefore used as thickeners or to add texture to drinks.) Okra mucilage can be  exploited as a thickener in soups and stews (as it is in Louisiana gumbo, either to  replace or augment powdered sassafras leaf), or its qualities can be minimized by  using dry cooking methods (frying, baking). In Africa, slices of the pod are sun-  dried. Okra has a mild flavor (though a relative,   A. moschatus,   produces aromatic  seeds from which perfumers extract the musky ingredient ambrette).  Okra fruits can be hairy and sometimes even spiny, and their inner layers bear  bundles of fibers that thicken and toughen as they mature. Small young fruits  three to five days old are the most tender. These subtropical natives are damaged  by storage temperatures below about 45ºF/7ºC.  Olives   Olives are the small fruits of   Olea europaea,   a remarkably hardy, drought-  tolerant tree that’s native to the eastern Mediterranean region, and that can live  and bear for a thousand years. In addition to sustenance, the olive has given us an  everyday word: its ancient Greek name   elaia   is the source of the English   oil   (and  Italian   olio,   French   huile ). The pulp layer surrounding the large central seed can be  as much as 30% oil, which prehistoric peoples could extract by simple grinding  and draining, and used in cooking and lamps, and for cosmetic purposes. Olives  are   also   unusual   among   our   commonly   eaten   fruits   for   being   extremely  unpalatable! They are richly endowed with bitter phenolic compounds, which offer  some protection from both microbes and mammals. (Wild olives are eaten and  their seeds dispersed mainly by birds, which swallow them whole; mammals chew  and damage seeds.) Their bitterness has long been moderated or removed by  various curing techniques (p. 295). The dark color of ripe olives comes from  purplish anthocyanin pigments in the outer layer of the fruit.
Today, about 90% of the large worldwide crop goes to making olive oil.  Making Olive Oil   Olive oil is made from the olive fruits when they are six to eight  months old, mature and approaching their maximum oil content, and just  beginning to turn color from green to purple; fully ripe fruits develop less of the  valued   green   aroma. The   olives   are   cleaned,   coarsely   crushed,   pit   and   all  (sometimes along with some leaves from the tree), and finely ground into a paste  to break the fruit cells open and free their oil. The paste is mixed for 20–40 minutes  to give the oil droplets a chance to separate from the watery mass of olive flesh  and coalesce with each other (this step is called “malaxation”). Then the paste is  pressed to squeeze both oil and watery liquid from the solids. More oil, but of  lesser quality, is extracted by pressing repeatedly and by heating the paste; oil  extracted in the “first cold pressing” is the most delicate and stable, and most likely  to yield “extra virgin” oil (below). Finally, the oil is separated from the liquid by  centrifuge or other means, and filtered.  Olive Oil  Among food oils, olive oil is unique for being extracted not from a dry grain or  nut, but from a fleshy fruit, and for carrying the prominent flavors of that fruit.  The most prized olive oils are sold unrefined and shortly after harvest, as fresh  as possible, and are used more as a delicious, delicate flavoring in their own  right, not as a medium in which to cook other ingredients. Italy, France, and  other Mediterranean countries are the largest producers and consumers.  The Color and Flavor of Olive Oil   The result is an oil that’s green-gold from the  presence of chlorophyll and carotenoid pigments (beta-carotene and lutein), more  or less pungent from a variety of phenolic compounds and certain products of fat  breakdown (hexanol), and aromatic from dozens of volatile molecules. These  include flowery and citrusy terpenes, fruity esters, nutty and earthy and almondy  and hay-like molecules; but above all there are the grassy, “green”-smelling  fragments of fatty acids that are also characteristic of leaf and other green  vegetables (artichokes), herbs, and apples. Most of these molecules are generated  during the grinding and malaxation, when active enzymes from the damaged fruit
cells come into contact with vulnerable polyunsaturated fatty acids in the green  chloroplasts. (Leaves are sometimes included in the grinding to supply more  chloroplasts.) The oil itself is predominantly monounsaturated (oleic acid) and less  vulnerable to oxidation.  The Quality of Olive Oil   Olive oil quality is judged by its overall flavor and by its  content of “free fatty acids,” or fatty carbon chains that should be bound up in  intact oil molecules but instead are floating free, and that are evidence that the oil  is damaged and unstable. Under the regulations of the European Economic  Community, “extra virgin” olive oil must contain less than0.8% free fatty acids,  “virgin” oil less than 2%. (To date, quality labeling of U.S. oils is not regulated.) Oils  with higher free fatty acid levels are usually processed to remove nearly all  impurities from the remaining intact oil molecules — including desirable flavor  molecules. Producers usually blend such refined or “pure” oil with some virgin oil to  give it flavor.  Storing Olive Oil   The fact that virgin olive oils are unrefined has both desirable and  undesirable consequences. Of course the beautiful color and rich flavor are great  assets. The oils also contain significant quantities of antioxidant substances —  phenolic compounds, carotenoids, and tocopherols (vitamin E and relatives) —  which make them more resistant than other oils to damage by oxygen in the air.  However, the same chlorophyll that colors them also makes them especially  vulnerable to damage by light, whose energy the chlorophyll is designed to  collect. To prevent “photooxidation” and the development of stale, harsh aromas,  olive oil is best stored in the dark — in opaque cans, for example — and in cool  conditions, which slow all chemical reactions.  Plantains   Plantains are varieties of banana that retain much of their starchiness  even when ripe, and are treated like other starchy vegetables. They’re described  along with their sweeter cousins on p. 378.  Seaweeds  Seaweed   is a very general term for large plants that inhabit the oceans. Nearly all  ocean plants are   algae,   a biological group that has dominated the waters for close  to a billion years, and that gave rise to all land plants, including those that feed us.  There are more than 20,000 species of algae, and humans have enjoyed many  hundreds of them. They’ve been especially important foods throughout coastal
Asia, in the British Isles, and in places as different as Iceland and Hawaii, where  they’re among very few native edibles. The Japanese use seaweeds as wrappers  and to make salads and soups; in China they serve as a vegetable; in Ireland they’re  mashed up in porridge and thicken desserts. Most seaweeds have a richly savory  taste and a fresh aroma reminiscent of the seacoast, which in fact they help to  perfume. Many are good sources of vitamins A, B, C, and E, of iodine and other  minerals, and when dried may be a third protein. Seaweeds are abundant, renew  themselves rapidly over a life span of one or two years, and are easily preserved by  drying. In Japan, where they’ve been cultivated since the 17th century, the farmed  production of the seaweed used to wrap sushi is more valuable than the harvest of  any other aquacultural product, including fish and shellfish.  The watery home of the seaweeds has shaped their nature in several ways that  matter to the cook:  •   Their buoyancy in water has allowed free-floating algae to minimize tough  structural supports and maximize photosynthetic tissue. Some algae (e.g.,  nori, sea lettuce) are essentially all leaf, just one or two cells thick, very  tender and delicate.  •   Their immersion in salt waters of varying concentration has led algae to  accumulate various molecules to keep their cells in osmotic balance. Some  of these molecules contribute to their characteristic flavor. Mannitol, a sugar  alcohol, is sweet (and, since our bodies can’t metabolize it, low-calorie; see p.  662); glutamic acid is savory; and certain complex sulfur compounds give  rise to aromatic, oceany dimethyl sulfide.  •   Because water selectively absorbs red wavelengths from sunlight, some  algae supplement their chlorophyll with special pigments for capturing the  remaining wavelengths. Many seaweeds are either brown or reddish-purple,  and change color when cooked.  •   The many physical stresses of ocean life have encouraged some seaweeds to  fill their cell walls with large quantities of jelly-like material that gives their  tissues strength and flexibility, can be sloughed from their surface, and can  help keep coastal species moist when they’re exposed to the air at low tide.  These special carbohydrates turn out to be useful for making jellies (agar)  and for thickening various foods (algin, carrageenan). (More on thickeners in  chapter 11.)
Some Prominent Edible Seaweeds  Scientific Name   Uses  Green Algae  Sea lettuce   Ulva lactuca   Raw salads, soups  Sea grapes   Caulerpa racemosa   Peppery; eaten fresh or sugarcoated  (Indonesia)  Awonori   Enteromorpha,  Monostrema   species  Powdered condiment (Japan)  Red Algae  Nori, laver   Porphyra   species   Oatmeal mush (Ireland); sushi wrappers  or fried sheets (Japan)  Agar,  tengusa  Gracilaria   species   Branching stems; raw, salted, pickled,  gelling agent for molded sweets (agar-  agar, Japanese kanten)  Irish moss,  carrageen  Chondrus crispus   Thickening agent for desserts  (carrageenan)  Dulse, sea  parsley  Palmaria palmata   With potatoes, milk, soup, breads  (Ireland)  Brown Algae  Kelp, kombu   Laminaria   species   Soup base (dashi), salads, fried (Japan)  Wakame   Undaria   species   Miso soup, salads (Japan)  Hiziki   Hizikia fusiformis   Vegetable, soups, “tea” (Japan, China)  Green, Red, and Brown Algae  Nearly all edible seaweeds belong to one of three broad groups: the green algae,  the red algae, and the brown algae.  •   Green algae — sea lettuce, awonori — are the most like the land plants to  which   they   gave   rise.   Their   primary   photosynthetic   pigments   are
chlorophylls, with smaller amounts of carotenoids, and they store energy in  the form of starch.  •   Red algae — nori, dulse — are most common in tropical and subtropical  waters. They owe their color to special pigment-protein complexes that are  soluble in water and sensitive to heat: so during cooking their color can  change quite strikingly from red to green. Red algae store their energy in a  distinctive form of starch, and also produce large quantities of the sugar  galactose and chains made up from it, which give us the gelling agents agar-  agar and carrageenan.  •   Brown   algae   —   kelp,   wakame   —   dominate   temperate   waters   and  supplement their chlorophyll with a group of carotenoid pigments, notably  brownish fucoxanthin. They store some of their energy in the sweet sugar  alcohol mannitol, which can amount to a quarter of the dry weight of fall-  harvested kelp, and their typical mucilaginous material is algin.  Some freshwater algae are also collected from rivers and ponds: for example,  species of   Cladophora,   which in Southeast Asia are pressed into nori-like sheets  and used similarly (Laotian kaipen). Two alga-like creatures that are actually blue-  green bacteria sometimes figure in the kitchen: the nutritional supplement  spirulina and the Chinese “hair vegetable” or “hair moss,” species of   Nostoc,   which  grows in mountain springs in the Mongolian desert.  Seaweed Flavors  When it comes to flavor, the three seaweed families share a basic salty-savory taste  from concentrated minerals and amino acids, especially glutamic acid, which is  one of the molecules used to transport energy from one part of the seaweed to  another. Seaweeds also share the aroma of dimethyl sulfide, which is found in  cooked milk, corn, and shellfish as well as in seacoast air. There are also fragments  of highly unsaturated fatty acids (mainly aldehydes) that contribute green-tea-like  and fishy overtones. Against this common background, the three families do have  distinctive characters. Dried, the red seaweeds tend to develop a deeper sulfury  aroma from hydrogen sulfide and methanethiol, as well as flowery, black-tea-like  notes from breakdown of their carotene pigments. When fried, dulse develops a  distinct aroma of bacon. Some red algae, including the limu kohu of Hawaii  ( Asparagopsis ), accumulate compounds of bromine and iodine, and can have a  strong iodine flavor. The generally mild brown seaweeds have a characteristic
iodine note (iodooctane) as well as a hay-like one (from the terpene cubenol). A  few, notably species of   Dictyopteris   used as flavorings in Hawaii, have spicy aroma  compounds that are apparently reproductive signals. Some browns are noticeably  astringent thanks to the presence of tannin-like phenolic compounds, which in the  dried seaweed form brown-black complexes (phycophaeins).  Prolonged cooking in liquid tends to accentuate fishy aromas, so often seaweeds  are cooked only briefly. The first step in making the Japanese soup base dashi, for  example, is to start dried brown kelp kombu in cold water, bring it just to the boil,  then remove the kombu, leaving behind mainly its savory soluble minerals and  amino acids. Because flavorsome minerals and amino acids crystallize on and in  dried seaweeds, they contribute more when they’re left unwashed, and if thick,  when scored with a knife to release substances from within.  Seaweed and the Original MSG  It was a seaweed that provoked a breakthrough in the understanding of  human taste — and also brought the world the controversial food additive  known as MSG. For better than a thousand years, the Japanese have been  using the brown alga kombu as the base for soup stocks. In 1908 a Japanese  chemist, Kikunae Ikeda, found that kombu is an especially rich source of  monosodium glutamate — in fact it forms crystals on the surface of dried  kombu. He also found that MSG provides a unique, savory taste sensation,  different from the standard sweet, sour, salty, and bitter. He named this  sensation   umami   (a rough translation is “delicious”), and pointed out that  other foods, including meats and cheese, also provide it. For decades, Western  scientists were skeptical that umami was a genuine taste sensation of its own,  and not just a general taste enhancer. Finally, in 2001, biologist Charles Zuker  at the University of California, San Diego, and colleagues demonstrated  conclusively that humans and other animals do have a specific taste receptor  for MSG.  A few years after Ikeda’s observations, a colleague of his discovered a different  umami substance (inosine monophosphate, or IMP) in cured skipjack tuna,  another soup-base ingredient (p. 237). Then in 1960, Akira Kuninaka reported
an umami substance in shiitake mushrooms (guanosine monophosphate, or  GMP). Kuninaka also discovered that these different substances were  synergistic with each other and with MSG: a very small amount of each  strengthens the other’s taste. Sensory scientists are still working to  understand the nature of these effects.  A year after Ikeda’s discovery, the Japanese company Ajinomoto began selling  pure MSG as a seasoning, extracting it from the wheat gluten proteins that  are a rich source of glutamate and in fact gave it its name. It caught on  quickly, first with cooks in Japan and China and then with food manufacturers  throughout the world. Ajinomoto is now a large multinational corporation; it  and other companies produce MSG by the ton using bacteria that synthesize  large amounts and excrete it into the liquid they grow in.  Beginning in the late 1960s, MSG was blamed for the “Chinese restaurant  syndrome,” in which distressing sensations of burning, pressure, and chest  pain suddenly strike susceptible people who begin a Chinese meal with MSG-  laden soup. Many studies later, toxicologists have concluded that MSG is a  harmless ingredient for most people, even in large amounts. The most  unfortunate aspect of the MSG saga is how it has been exploited to provide a  cheap, one-dimensional substitute for real and remarkable foods. As Fuchsia  Dunlop writes in her book on Sichuan cooking,   Land of Plenty ,  It is a bitter irony that in China of all places, where chefs have spent centuries  developing the most sophisticated culinary techniques, this mass-produced  white powder should have been given the name   wei jing,   “the essence of  flavor.”
Mushrooms, Truffles, and Relatives  Mushrooms and their relatives are not true plants. They belong to a separate  biological kingdom, the Fungi (the plural form of   fungus ), which they share with  molds and yeasts.  Creatures of Symbiosis and Decay  Unlike plants, the fungi have no chlorophyll and cannot harvest energy from  sunlight. They therefore live off the substance of other living things, including  plants and plant remains. Different mushrooms do this in different ways. Some  mushrooms, including boletes and truffles, form a symbiosis with living trees, a  relationship in which both partners benefit: the mushrooms gather soil minerals  and share them with the tree roots, which in turn share the tree’s sugars with the  mushrooms. Some fungi are parasites on living plants and cause disease; we eat  the plant parasite that infects corncobs (corn smut, or huitlacoche). And some,  including the world’s most popular mushrooms, live off the decaying remains of  dead plants. White and brown mushrooms apparently evolved along with plant-  eating mammals to take advantage of the animals’ partly digested but nutrient-  rich dung! They now thrive in artificial piles of compost and manure.  Mushrooms that live on decaying plants have been relatively easy to cultivate. The  Chinese were raising shiitake mushrooms on oak logs in the 13th century. The  cultivation of the common white mushroom began in 17th-century France and  boomed during the Napoleonic era in quarry tunnels near Paris. Today,   Agaricus  bisporus   (or   A. brunnescens ) is grown on a mixture of manure, straw, and soil in dark  buildings with carefully controlled humidity and temperature. The tropical zone’s  version of the button mushroom is the (paddy-) straw mushroom, which grows on  composted rice straw. On the other hand, cultivation of symbiotic species is  difficult, because the mushrooms need living trees, and intensive production  requires a forest. This is why boletes, chanterelles, and truffles are relatively rare  and expensive: they’re still largely gathered from the wild. Of an estimated 1,000  edible mushroom species, only a few dozen have been successfully cultivated.
Mushroom Types and Qualities  Mushrooms are grouped by broad family relationships. Most edible  mushrooms bear their spores on gills.  Mushrooms with Gills  Common mushrooms White,  button Brown, cremini,  portobello Champignon, field  Almond  Cultivated leaf and  dung  decomposers  Almond flavor  Agaricus   species   A.  bisporus   var.   alba   A.  bisporus   var.   avellanea  Agaricus campestris  Agaricus subrufescens  Oyster, tree oyster   Cultivated wood  decomposers  Pleurotus   species  Shiitake   Cultivated oak  decomposers  Lentinus edodes  Matsutake   Wild red pine  decomposers;  pine, cinnamon  flavors  Tricholoma   species  Honey   Wild wood  decomposers  Armillariella   species  Mousseron, fairy ring   Wild leaf  decomposers  Marasmius   species  Winter, enokitake   Cultivated wood  decomposers;gro  ws at 32ºF/0ºC  Flammulina velutipes  Blewit   Wild leaf  decomposers;pur  ple, blue colors  Clitocybe nuda  Straw mushroom   Rice straw  decomposers  Volvariella volvacea
Parasol   Wild, cultivated  leaf decomposers  Lepiota   species  Ink cap   Wild compost  decomposers  Coprinus   species  Nameko, cinnamon cap   Cultivated wood  decomposers;  gelatinous cap  Pholiota species  Bolete, porcini, cèpe   Wild tree  symbionts  Boletus   species  Candy cap   Wild wood  decomposers  Lactarius rubidus  Mushrooms without Gills  Hen of the woods, maitake   Wild oak  decomposers  Grifola frondosa  Chicken of the woods, sulfur  shelf  Wild tree  decomposers  Laetiporus sulphureus  Hedgehog, lion’s mane   Wild tree  symbionts  Hydnum   species  Cauliflower   Wild tree parasites   Sparassis crispa  Chanterelle   Wild tree  symbionts; gold,  white, red  Cantharellus   species  Black chanterelle, horn of  plenty  Wild tree  symbionts  Craterellus   species  Ears: wood ear, tree ear, cloud  ear  Cultivated wood  decomposers;gela  tinous; protease  Auricularia   species  Snow, silver ears, white jelly   Cultivated wood  decomposers;  gelatinous;  desserts!  Tremella fuciformis
Puffballs   Wild compost  decomposers  Calvatia, Lycoperdon   sp.  Morels   Wild tree  decomposers  Morchella   species  Truffles   Wild tree  symbionts  Tuber   species  Lobster   Wild mushroom  decomposers  Hypomyces lactifluorum  The Structure and Qualities of Mushrooms  Mushrooms differ from plants in several important ways. The part we eat is only  one small portion of the organism, most of which lives invisibly underground as a  fine, cottony network of fibers, or hyphae, which ramify through the soil to gather  nutrients. A single cubic centimeter of soil — a small fraction of a cubic inch — can  contain as much as 2,000 meters/yards of hyphae! When the underground mass of  fibers has accumulated enough material and energy, it organizes a new, dense  growth of interwoven hyphae into a fruiting body, which it pumps up with water  to break above the soil surface and release its offspring spores into the air. The  mushrooms that we eat are these fruiting bodies. (Morels form unusual hollow  fruiting bodies with a distinctive honeycombed cap; the depressions bear the  spores.)  Because the fruiting body is critical to the mushroom’s reproduction and survival,  it’s often protected from animal attack by defensive poisons. Some mushroom  poisons are deadly. This is why wild mushrooms should be gathered only by  experts in mushroom identification. One mushroom traditionally gathered and  eaten in Europe is now thought to present an unpredictable but real risk of  potentially fatal hydrazine poisoning; this is the gyromitre or false morel (species of  Gyromitra ).  Inflated by water as they are, mushrooms are 80–90% water, with a thin outer  cuticle that allows rapid moisture loss and gain. Their cell walls are reinforced not  by plant cellulose, but by   chitin,   the carbohydrate-amine complex that also makes
up the outer skeleton of insects and crustaceans. Mushrooms are notable for  containing much more protein and vitamin B 12 than other fresh produce. A  number of mushrooms have been used in traditional medicines, and there is  scientific evidence that some of the unusual cell-wall carbohydrates in shiitakes,  matsutakes, and the interestingly crunchy-gelatinous ear mushrooms contain  substances that inhibit tumor growth. Another factor in shiitakes may limit the  production of mutagenic nitrosamines in our digestive systems.  The anatomy of a mushroom. The hyphae are nutrient-gathering threads that grow  through the soil. The main body of the mushroom is a fruiting body that the hyphae  push up through the soil surface, which disperses spores from its gills  The Distinctive Flavors of Mushrooms  We prize fungi for their rich, almost meaty flavor and their ability to intensify the  flavor of many dishes. These qualities are largely due to a high content of free  amino acids, including glutamic acid, which makes mushrooms — like seaweeds  — a concentrated natural source of monosodium glutamate. Another taste  enhancer that’s synergistic with glutamate, GMP (guanosine monophosphate), was  first discovered in shiitake mushrooms, and contributes to the rich taste.  The characteristic aroma of fresh common mushrooms is mainly due to octenol (an  8-carbon alcohol), which is produced by enzymes from polyunsaturated fats when  the tissue is damaged, and which helps deter attack by some snails and insects.  More octenol is generated from the gill tissues than from other parts, and this is  one reason that common mushrooms with immature, unopened caps are less
flavorful than the mature version with prominent gills. Brown and field mushrooms  have more flavor than the white mushroom, and the “portobello,” a brown  mushroom allowed to mature for an additional five or six days until it’s about 6  in/15 cm across, is especially intense.  Other mushrooms offer a wide range of aromas. A close relative of the common  mushroom produces the essence of almond extract, while more exotic species are  valued   for   such   flavor   notes   as   cinnamon,   pepper,   garlic,   pine   needles,  butterscotch, and shellfish. Shiitake mushrooms owe their distinctive aroma to an  unusual molecule called lenthionine, a ring of carbon and sulfur atoms, which is  created by enzymes when the tissue is damaged. Lenthionine production is  maximized by the common practice of drying and then rehydrating shiitakes in  warm water (it’s minimized by rapid cooking of the fresh or dried mushroom,  which destroys enzymes before they have a chance to act). With a few exceptions  (chanterelles,   oysters,   matsutakes),   drying   intensifies   mushroom   flavor   by   a  combination of heightened enzyme activities and browning reactions between  amino acids and sugars. Shiitakes and boletes, or porcini, are familiar examples,  and especially flavorful because they’re endowed with sulfur compounds that  generate meaty aromas. Even home-dried button mushrooms are far more  flavorful than the fresh originals, though they lose their fresh-mushroom octenol.  Storing and Handling Mushrooms  Mushrooms remain very active after harvest compared to most produce, and may  even continue to grow. During four days’ storage at room temperature, they lose  about half of their energy reserves to the formation of cell-wall chitin. At the same  time, they lose some of the enzyme activities that generate their fresh flavor, while  protein-digesting enzymes become active in the stalk and turn the stalk proteins  into amino acids for the cap and gills; so these parts become slightly more savory.  Refrigeration at 40–45ºF/4–6ºC will slow mushroom metabolism, but they should  be   loosely   wrapped   in   moisture-absorbing   packaging   to   avoid   having   the  moisture they exhale wet their surfaces and encourage spoilage. Mushrooms  should be used as quickly as possible after purchase.  Cookbooks often advise against washing mushrooms so as not to make them  soggy or dilute their flavor. However, they’re already mostly water, and lose little if  any flavor from a brief rinse. They should be cooked immediately, however, since
washing can damage the surface cells and cause general discoloration.  Cooking Mushrooms  Mushrooms can be cooked in many different ways. Their flavor is generally most  developed and intense when they are cooked slowly with dry heat to allow  enzymes some time to work before being inactivated, and to cook out some of  their abundant water and concentrate the amino acids, sugars, and aromas. Heat  also collapses air pockets and consolidates the texture. (The combination of water  and air loss means that mushrooms shrink considerably when cooked.) Like  cellulose, chitin and some other cell-wall materials are not soluble in water, so  mushrooms don’t get mushy with prolonged cooking. The jelly and ear fungi,  which are popular in Asian cuisines, contain an unusual amount of soluble  carbohydrates, and this is why they develop a gelatinous texture.  Many mushrooms, and especially their gills, are rich in browning enzymes and  blacken rapidly when cut or crushed. The dark pigments are water-soluble and can  stain other ingredients in a dish, which may or may not be desirable.  Truffles  Truffles are the fruiting bodies of species in the genus   Tuber,   of which there are a  handful of commercially important ones. They’re typically a dense, knobby mass,  ranging from walnut-to fist-sized or larger. Unlike mushrooms, truffles remain  hidden underground. They spread their spores by emitting a scent to attract  animals — including beetles, squirrels, rabbits, and deer — which find and eat  them and spread the spores in their dung. This is why truffles have a musky,  persistent aroma — to attract their spore spreaders — and why they’re still  gathered with the help of trained dogs or pigs or by spotting truffle “flies,” insects  that hover over truffled ground and lay their eggs there so that the larvae can  burrow down and feed on the fungus.  Truffles grow only in symbiosis with trees, usually oaks, hazels, or lindens, so  cultivation means finding or planting a forest, with significant harvests coming  only after a decade or more. The Périgord region in France remains renowned for  its black winter truffles,   Tuber melanosporum,   and northern and central Italy for its  white truffle,   Tuber magnatum Pico.   Both are in great demand, in limited supply,  and so quite expensive. Their flavor can be bought more reasonably in the form of
cooked whole truffles or truffle paste, or truffle-infused oils, butter, and flours,  though some of these may be flavored artificially. There are a number of other  truffle species harvested in Europe, Asia, and North America, but they’re not as  flavorful. Unripe truffles of any species will have little flavor.  Truffle anatomy. Like mushrooms, the truffle is the fruiting body of a fungus; unlike  mushrooms, it remains underground. The spores are contained in the thick masses of  tissue between the vein-like folds.  The flavors of black and white truffles are quite distinct. Black truffles are relatively  subtle and earthy, with a mix of a dozen or so alcohols and aldehydes, and some  dimethyl sulfide. (They also contain small amounts of androstenone, a steroid  compound also found in men’s underarm sweat and secreted in the saliva of the  male pig, where it prompts mating behavior in the sow. Some people are unable to  smell androstenone, while others can and may find it unappetizing.) White truffles  have a stronger, pungent, somewhat garlicky aroma thanks to a number of  unusual sulfur compounds. The flavor of black truffles is generally thought to be  enhanced by gentle cooking, while the flavor of white truffles, though strong, is  fragile, and best enjoyed by shaving paper-thin slices onto a dish just before  serving. Such cross sections of truffle reveal its inner structure: a network of fine  veins running between masses of spore-bearing cells.  Fresh truffles are very perishable and emit their aroma in storage. They’re best kept  refrigerated in a closed container with some material — often rice — to absorb  moisture and keep their surface from getting wet and spoiled by microbes.  Huitlacoche, or Corn Smut  Huitlacoche is a parasitic fungus,   Ustilago maydis,   that attacks corn plants, and that
has been eaten in Mexico and Central America since Aztec times. It infects various  plant parts, including the kernels in the growing ear, and develops into irregular  spongy masses or “galls” that are a combination of greatly enlarged plant cells,  nutrient-absorbing fungal threads, and blue-black spores. Fully mature galls are  dry, black spore bags. The optimum stage for harvest is two to three weeks after  infection, when the galls on a single ear can weigh as much as a pound/500 gm  and are about three-quarters black inside. When cooked, these immature galls  develop a sweet, savory, woody flavor thanks to glucose, sotolon, and vanillin. In  the United States, corn smut was simply a disease until the 1990s, when growing  interest in Mexican food led some farmers to cultivate it intentionally.  A related smut,   U. esculenta,   is eaten in China and Japan. An Asian wild rice,   Zizania  latifolia,   develops the infection in its upper stem, which swells with hyphae. The  stems are cooked and eaten as a vegetable (Chinese kah-peh-sung, Japanese  makomotake) whose flavor is said to resemble bamboo shoots.  Mycoprotein, or Quorn  Mycoprotein is a 20th-century invention, an edible form of the normally useless  underground hyphae of a common fungus,   Fusarium venenatum.   A strain of the  fungus originally taken from a field in Buck-inghamshire, England, is grown in a  liquid medium in a factory-scale fermenter. The resulting mass of hyphae is  harvested, washed, and rapidly heated. This produces microscopic fibers that are  rich in protein and about 0.5 mm long and 0.003–0.005 mm in diameter, or about  the dimensions of muscle fibers in meat. This essentially tasteless mycoprotein  (from   myco-,   “related to fungi”) can then be manufactured into meat substitutes  and a variety of other food products.
A Survey of Common Fruits  The vegetables described in chapter 6 are mainly plant parts with either mild,  accidental flavors (roots, leaves, stalks) or strong defensive ones (the onion and  cabbage families). We usually cook them, because cooking improves their flavor  and makes them softer and easier to eat. The fruits described in this chapter are  parts that the plant creates in order to attract animals to eat them and disperse the  seeds within them. So the plant fills these fruits with a mouthwatering mixture of  sugars and acids, endows them with pleasant aromas and eye-catching colors, and  softens them for us: they’re delicious and beautiful even when raw. The box on pp.  382–383 summarizes   the   essential   flavor   elements   of some   common   fruits,  especially   the   balance   between   sweet   and   sour   that   provides   their   taste  foundation.  The Making of Fruit: Ripening  Among all our foods, fruits are unique in the way that they progress from  inedibility to deliciousness. Immature vegetables and young meat animals are at  their tenderest and most delicate, but immature fruits are usually at their least  appealing. We may still eat and enjoy them — green tomatoes, green papayas,  green mangoes — but we treat them as vegetables, cut them small for a salad or  cook or pickle them. In order to graduate from vegetablehood, fruits must  undergo the process called ripening, which creates their distinctive character.  Before Ripening: Growth And Expansion  A fruit is a distinct organ that develops from the flower, and in particular from the  flower’s female tissue, the ovary, which encloses the plant’s maturing seeds. Most  fruits are simply the thickened ovary wall, or else they incorporate nearby tissues  as well. Apples and pears, for example, are made up mainly of the stem tip in which  the flower parts are embedded. The fruit usually develops into three distinct layers:  a thin outer protective skin, a thin inner protective coat around the central mass of  seeds, and a thick, succulent, flavorful layer in between.  Object 6
Food Words:   Ripe, Climacteric  Our word   ripe   began as an Old English word meaning “ready for reaping,” and  like   reap   comes ultimately from an Indo-European root meaning “to cut.”   River,  rope, row,   and   rigatoni   are all relatives.   Climacteric   can be traced back to a root  meaning “to lean,” which led to the Greek   climax,   “ladder,” then offshoots  meaning “rung” and therefore “a dangerous place,” and finally   climacteric   itself,  meaning a critical stage in life — whether a human’s or a fruit’s.  Fruit goes through four distinct stages of development. The first is usually  fertilization of the female ovule by male pollen, which initiates the production of  growth-promoting hormones and so leads to the expansion of the flower’s ovary  wall. Some conveniently seedless fruits, including bananas, navel oranges, and  some grapes, manage to develop without fertilization. The second, relatively brief  stage of fruit development is the multiplication of cells in the ovary wall, which in  the tomato is virtually complete at the moment of fertilization (you can see the  fully formed but tiny fruit at the base of the flower as soon as it opens).  Most of the noticeable growth during fruit development takes place during the  third stage, the expansion of the storage cells. This growth can be remarkable.  Melons at their most active put on better than 5 cubic inches/80 cc a day. Most of  this expansion is due to the accumulation of water-based sap in the cell vacuoles.  Mature fruit storage cells are among the largest in the plant kingdom, in  watermelons approaching a millimeter in diameter. During this growth stage,  sugar is stored in the cell vacuole as is or in more compact granules of starch.  Defensive compounds, among them poisonous alkaloids and astringent tannins,  accumulate in the cell vacuoles to deter infection or predation, and various  enzyme systems are readied for action. When the seeds become capable of  growing on their own and the fruit is ready to attract animals to disperse them, the  fruit is said to be mature.  The Work of Ethylene and Enzymes  The final stage of fruit development is ripening, a drastic change in the life of the  fruit that leads to its death. It consists of several simultaneous events. Starch and
acid   levels   decrease,   and   sugars   increase.   The   texture   softens;   defensive  compounds disappear. A characteristic aroma develops. Skin color changes,  usually from green to a shade of yellow or red. The fruit thus becomes sweeter,  softer, and tastier, and it advertises these improvements visually. Because ripening  soon gives way to rot-ting, ripening was long considered to be an early stage in the  fruit’s general disintegration. But it’s now clear that ripening is a last, intense phase  of life. As it ripens, the fruit actively prepares for its end, organizing itself into a  feast for our eye and palate.  Fruits: Their Potential for Improvement after Harvest, and Optimal  Storage Temperatures  Fruit  Improvements after  Harvest  Store at  32°F/0°C  Store at  45°F/7°C  Store at  55°F/13°C  Pome  Apple   Sweetness, aroma,  softness   +  Pear   Sweetness, aroma,  softness   +  Stone  Apricot   Aroma, softness   +  Cherry   -   +  Peach   Aroma, softness   +  Plum   Aroma, softness   +  Citrus  Orange   -   +  Grapefruit   -   +  Lemon   -   +  Lime   -   +  Berries
Fruit  Improvements after  Harvest  Store at  32°F/0°C  Store at  45°F/7°C  Store at  55°F/13°C  Blackberry   +  Black currant   +  Blueberry   Aroma, softness   +  Cranberry   -   +  Gooseberry   -   +  Grape   -   +  Raspberry   Aroma, softness   +  Red currant   -   +  Strawberry   -   +  Melons  Cantaloupe   Aroma, softness   +  Honeydew   Aroma, softness   +  Watermelon   -   +  Tropical  Banana   Sweetness, aroma,  softness   +  Cherimoya   Aroma, softness   +  Guava   Aroma, softness   +  Lychee   -   +  Mango   Sweetness, aroma,  softness   +  Papaya   Aroma, softness   +  Passion fruit   Aroma, softness   +  Pineapple   -   Ripe   Unripe  Others  Avocado   Aroma, softness   Ripe   Unripe
Fruit  Improvements after  Harvest  Store at  32°F/0°C  Store at  45°F/7°C  Store at  55°F/13°C  Date   -   +  Fig   -   +  Kiwi   Sweetness, aroma,  softness   +  Persimmon   Aroma, softness   +  Pomegranate   -   +  Tomato   Aroma, softness   +  Most of the changes in ripening are caused by a host of enzymes, which break  down complex molecules into simpler ones, and also generate new molecules just  for this moment in the fruit’s life. There is a single trigger that sets the ripening  enzymes into action. The first clues to its identity came around 1910. From the  Caribbean islands came a report that bananas stored near some oranges had  ripened earlier than the other bunches. Then California citrus growers noticed that  green fruit kept near a kerosene stove changed color faster than the rest. What  secret ripening agent did stove and fruit have in common? The answer came two  decades later: ethylene, a simple hydrocarbon gas produced by both plants and  kerosene combustion, which triggers ripening in mature but unripe fruit. Much  later, scientists found that fruits themselves produce ethylene well in advance of  ripening. It is thus a hormone that initiates this process in an organized way.  Two Styles of Ripening, Two Ways of Handling  There are two different styles of ripening among fruits. One is dramatic. When  triggered by ethylene, the fruit stimulates itself by producing more ethylene, and  begins to   respire   — to use up oxygen and produce carbon dioxide — from two to  five times faster than before. Its flavor, texture, and color change rapidly, and  afterwards they often decline rapidly as well. Such “climacteric” fruits can be  harvested while mature but still green, and will ripen well on their own, especially  if nudged by an artificial dose of ethylene. They often store their sugars in the form
of starch, which enzymes convert back into sweetness during the post-harvest  ripening.  The other style of ripening is undramatic. “Nonclimacteric” fruits don’t respond to  ethylene with their own escalating ethylene production. They ripen gradually,  usually don’t store sugars as starch, and so depend on their connection to the  parent plant for continued sweetening. Once harvested, they get no sweeter,  though other enzyme actions may continue to soften cell walls and generate  aroma molecules.  These basic styles of ripening determine how fruits are handled in commerce and  in the kitchen. Climacteric fruits like bananas and avocados, pears and tomatoes  can be picked mature but still hard to minimize physical damage, packed and  shipped to their destinations, then gassed with ethylene to ripen them for the  produce bin. Consumers can hasten the process by enclosing the fruits in a paper  bag with a ripe fruit (plastic traps too much moisture) to expose them to an active  ethylene emitter and concentrate the ethylene gas in the air around them.  Nonclimacteric fruits like pineapples, citrus fruits, most berries, and melons don’t  store starch or improve markedly after harvest, so their quality depends mainly on  how far they had ripened on the plant. They’re best when picked and shipped as  ripe as possible, and there’s nothing consumers can do to influence their quality:  we simply have to choose good ones in the first place.  With just a few exceptions (pears, avocados, kiwis, bananas), even climacteric fruits  will be much better if they’re allowed to ripen on the plant, from which they can  continue to accumulate the raw materials of flavor until the harvest.  Common Fruits of Temperate Climates: Apple and  Pear, Stone Fruits, Berries  Pome Fruits: Apple, Pear, and Relatives  Apples, pears, and quinces are closely related members of the rose family, natives  of Eurasia that were domesticated in prehistoric times. They are a kind of fruit  known as a   pome   (from the Latin for “fruit”). The fleshy portion of a pome fruit is  the greatly enlarged tip of the flower stem. The remains of the flower project from  the bottom of the fruit, and the few small seeds are protected in a tough-walled
core. Apples and their relatives are climacteric fruit, and contain starch stores that  can be turned into sugar after harvest. They generally keep well in cold storage,  though late-harvested fruit tend to develop brown cores. Apples are generally sold  ripe and keep best if immediately wrapped and refrigerated; pears are sold unripe  and are best ripened at relatively cool room temperatures, then refrigerated  without close wrapping.  The reddish colors of pome fruits (usually in the skin but sometimes in the flesh)  are due mainly to water-soluble anthocyanin pigments, their yellow and cream  colors to fat-soluble carotenoids, including beta-carotene and lutein (pp. 257, 267).  These fruits are good sources of phenolic antioxidant compounds (p. 267),  particularly simple ones (chlorogenic acid, also found in coffee), which are  especially concentrated in the skin. Some apples have an antioxidant activity  equivalent to the vitamin C in 30 equal portions of orange!  Apples and pears owe their primary flavors to characteristic esters (see box, p. 355).  The flavors of pome fruits differ among varieties, among fruits on different parts of  a single tree, and even within a single fruit, from top to bottom and from the core  outwards. Pears are often noticeably more flavorful at the flower end than at the  stem end. Both apples and pears contain an indigestible, slightly sweet sugar  alcohol, sorbitol (0.5%), so a large helping of cider can cause the same discomfort  as do inulin-rich foods (p. 307).  Apples   Apple trees are especially hardy and are probably the most widely  distributed fruit trees on the planet. There are 35 species in the genus   Malus.   The  species that gives us most of our eating apples,   Malus   x   domestica,   seems to have  originated in the mountains of Kazakhstan from crossings of an Asian species  ( Malus sieversii ) with several cousins. The domesticated apple spread very early  through the Middle East. It was known in the Mediterranean region by the time of  the Greek epics, and the Romans introduced it to the rest of Europe. These days  apple   production   is   an   international   enterprise,   with   southern   hemisphere  countries supplementing northern stored apples during the off-season, and  common varieties as likely to have come from Asia (e.g., Fuji, from Japan) as from  the West. There are several thousand named apple varieties, which can be divided  into four general groups.
Pome fruits and the flower from which they arise. The edible portion of apples and  pears derives from the flower base, or receptacle. Because the ovary is set below most  of the flower parts, the flower remains a scar at the bottom of the fruit.  •   Cider apples   (mainly the European native   Malus sylvestris ) are high-acid fruits  rich   in   astringent   tannins,   qualities   that   help   control   the   alcoholic  fermentation and clarify the liquid (tannins cross-link protein and cell-wall  particles and cause them to precipitate). They’re used only in cider making.  •   Dessert or eating apples   are crisp and juicy, and have a pleasing balance  between sour and sweet when eaten raw (pH 3.4, 15% sugar), but become  relatively bland when cooked. Most of the apples in supermarkets and  produce markets are dessert apples.  •   Cooking apples   are distinctly tart when raw (a pH around 3 and sugar content  around 12%), well-balanced when cooked, and have a firm flesh that tends  to maintain its structure when heated in pies or tarts, rather than falling  immediately into a puree or — as in some early “codling” varieties — into a  fluffy froth. Many countries have traditionally had their standard cooking  apples (France its   Calville blanc d’hiver,   England its Bramley’s Seedling,  Germany its   Glockenapfel   for strudel). But these are being replaced by dual-  purpose varieties.  •   Dual-purpose apples   are   adequate   either   raw   or   cooked   (e.g.,   Golden
Delicious, Granny Smith). These are usually at their best for cooking when  young and tart, best for eating when older and more mellow.  An apple’s potential for cooking can be tested by wrapping a few slices in  aluminum foil and baking in a hot oven for 15 minutes, or microwaving a few slices  wrapped in plastic film until the film balloons with steam.  Apple Flavor   Apple varieties can have very distinctive flavors, and these evolve  even after the fruit are picked from the tree. The English were great connoisseurs a  century ago, and Edward Bunyard wrote that by storing apples properly in a cool  place and tasting them periodically, the apple lover could “catch the volatile ethers  at their maximum development, and the acids and sugars at their most grateful  balance.” Apples do become more mellow with time because they consume some  of their malic acid for energy. Much of their aroma comes from the skin, where  volatile-creating enzymes are concentrated. The distinctive aroma of cooked apple  pulp comes largely from a floral-smelling fragment of the carotenoid pigments  (damascenone).  Fruit Aroma Compounds: Esters  Many fruits owe their characteristic aroma to chemicals called   esters.   An ester  molecule is a combination of two other molecules, an acid and an alcohol. A  typical plant cell contains many different kinds of acids, and several different  kinds of alcohol. The acids may be either tart substances in the cell fluids or  vacuole — acetic acid, cinnamic acid — or fatty-acid portions of oil molecules  and the molecules that make up cell membranes: hexanoic acid, butyric acid.  The alcohols are usually by-products of cell metabolism. Fruits have enzymes  that join these basic cell materials into aromatic esters. A single fruit will emit  many esters, but one or two account for most of its characteristic aroma.  Some examples:  ethyl alcohol + acetic acid = ethyl acetate, a characteristic note in apples  hexyl alcohol + acetic acid = hexyl acetate in pears  ethyl alcohol + butyric acid = ethyl butyrate in pineapple  isoamyl alcohol + acetic acid = isoamyl acetate in bananas
Some Distinctive Apple Flavors and Varieties  Flavor   Varieties  Simple, refreshing   Gravenstein, Granny Smith  Strawberry, raspberry   Northern Spy, Spitzenburg  Winey   McIntosh (well matured)  Aromatic and flowery   Cox’s Orange and Ribston Pippins  Honey   Golden Delicious (well matured), Fuji, Gala  Anise or tarragon   Ellison’s Orange, Fenouillet  Pineapple   Newtown Pippin, Ananas Reinette  Banana   Dodds  Nutty   Blenheim Orange  Nutmeg   D’Arcy Spice  Apple Air and Texture   Apples differ from pears in having as much as a quarter of  their volume occupied by air, thanks to open spaces between cells in the fruit.  (Pears are less than 5% air.) The air spaces contribute to the typical mealiness of an  overripe apple: as the cell walls soften and the cell interiors dry out, biting into the  apple simply pushes the largely separated cells apart from each other rather than  breaking the cells and releasing pent-up juices. Air cells become a factor in baking  whole apples; they fill with steam and expand as the apple cooks, and the skin will  split unless a strip is removed from the top to release the pressure.  Both apples and crabapples are good sources of cell-wall pectins (p. 265) and make  excellent jellies. For the same reason, a simple puree of apples has a thick,  satisfying consistency when briefly cooked into apple-sauce, or slowly reduced to  “apple butter.”  Apple Juice and Cider   Apple juice can be either opalescent or clear depending on  whether its pectins and proteins are left intact to deflect light rays. Made fresh, it  will stay pale and retain its fresh flavor for about an hour, after which the darkening  and   aroma-modifying   influences   of   enzymes   and   oxygen   become   evident.
Browning can be minimized by heating the juice rapidly to the boil to inactivate  the browning enzymes, but of course this lends a cooked flavor to the juice.  Pasteurized apple juice was first manufactured around 1900 in Switzerland, and is  now one of the most important commercial fruit products in the United States.  Cider is still an important product in northwest Spain, western France, and  England, where the traditional method was to let the fruit pulp ferment slowly  through the cold winter, reaching an alcohol content around 4%.  Pears   Pears are fruit of the genus   Pyrus,   more temperamental to grow than the  apple and less common, but called by some “the queen of fruit” for their  refinement of flavor, texture, and shape. Pears are less tart than apples, and denser.  The familiar elongated European pears, with mostly smooth flesh, are varieties of  the west Asian   Pyrus communis.   “Asian pears” are varieties of two species native to  China but intensively improved in Japan,   P. pyrifolia   and   P. ussuriensis.   They have a  juicy but crisp flesh, more or less gritty with cellulose-rich “stone cells,” and may be  elongated or apple-shaped. The characteristic aroma of pears comes from several  esters, including the “pear ester” (ethyl decadienoate).  In general, pears have a higher respiratory rate than apples and don’t store as well.  They’re unique among temperate fruits in being of the highest quality when  picked mature but still hard and ripened off the tree; picked after ripening begins,  their texture becomes mushy and their core breaks down. They will also develop a  mealy core if excessively warmed after cold storage. They’re best ripened slowly  over several days at between 65–68ºF/18–20ºC. Pears are sensitive to carbon  dioxide, so they shouldn’t be enclosed in plastic bags at any stage. Asian pears are  especially prone to bruising and are often marketed in protective sleeves.  Pear Varieties   Originally, all pears were gritty “sand pears” and hard-fleshed.  Centuries of breeding greatly reduced the prominence of gritty stone cells (but not  in varieties for making perry, the pear version of cider, where they’re valued for  helping   to   grind   the   flesh   before   fermentation).   The   soft “butter” texture  characteristic of many European pears was developed in the 18th century by  Belgian and French breeders. European pears are classified in three groups  according to when they’re harvested and their traditional storage life (now  extended by controlled atmospheres and temperatures). Summer pears like the  Bartlett (also called Williams or Bon chretien) are harvested in July and August and  keep for one to three months; autumn pears like the Bosc and Comice are  harvested in September and October and keep two to four months; and winter
pears like the Anjou and Winter Nellis are harvested in October and November and  keep six to seven months.  Quince   Quinces, fruit of the central Asian tree   Cydonia oblonga,   give us a taste of  what apples and pears might have been like in their primitive form. They are gritty  with stone cells, astringent, and hard even when ripe. But they have a distinctive,  flowery aroma (thanks to lactones and violet-like ionones, all derived from  carotenoid molecules) that’s especially concentrated in the fuzzy yellow skin. And  cooking domesticates them: heat breaks down and softens their pectin-rich cell  walls, and the astringent tannins become bound up in the debris, so the taste  softens as well. Quince paste firm enough to slice is a traditional product of Spain  ( membrillo ) and Italy ( cotognata ), and in Portugal a quince preserve was the  original marmalade ( marmalada ). The 16th-century alchemist and confectioner  Nostradamus gave several recipes for quince preserves and observed that cooks  “who peel them [before cooking] don’t know why they do this, for the skin  augments the odor.” (The same is true for apples.)  Quinces have another enchanting quality: when slices are slowly cooked in sugar  over several hours, they turn from a pale off-white to pink to a translucent, deep  ruby red. The key to this transformation is the fruit’s store of colorless phenolic  compounds, some of which cooking turns into anthocyanin pigments (p. 281).  Pears contain the same compounds, but in smaller quantities (common Bartletts  about a twenty-fifth, Packhams a tenth to a half), and so usually get pink at best.  Medlar   Medlars are small fruits of an apple relative ( Mespilus germanica ) native to  central Asia, now rare but once commonly grown in Europe as a winter fruit. Like  the quince, the medlar remains hard and astringent even when ripe, so it keeps  well and even improves if left on the tree through early frosts. It was made into  preserves, but more often it was “bletted” (a 19th-century coinage from the French  blessé,   “bruised”), or picked from the tree and kept in a cool, dry place for several  weeks until the enzymes in its own cells digest it from within, and its flesh turns  soft and brown. The astringency disappears, the malic acid is used up, and the  aroma develops strong overtones of spice, baked apples, wine, and gentle decay,  what D. H. Lawrence described as an “exquisite odour of leave-taking.”  Loquat   Loquats bear little resemblance to their cousin pomes. They are small,  elongated fruits of a Chinese tree,   Eriobotrya japonica,   which was greatly improved  by the Japanese and taken to many subtropical regions in the 19th century,
notably Sicily, where they are called   nespole.   They usually ripen early, before  cherries. They have a mild, delicate flavor and a wall of carotenoid-containing flesh  that runs from white to orange, surrounding several large seeds. U.S. varieties are  mainly ornamental and produce small fruit, while European and Asian fruits may  approach a half pound/250 gm. They’re eaten fresh, made into jellies and jams, and  cooked in a spicy syrup in the manner of “pickled” peaches. Loquats are neither  climacteric nor chill-sensitive, and so keep well.  Stone Fruits: Apricot, Cherry, Peach, and Plum  Stone fruits are all species of the genus   Prunus,   members of the large rose family  and relatives of the pome fruits. They owe their name to the stone-hard “shell” that  surrounds a single large seed at their center. Though the 15 species of   Prunus   are  found throughout the northern hemisphere, the important stone fruits mostly  come from Asia. They do not store starch and so get no sweeter after harvest,  though they do soften and develop aroma. Their internal tissues tend to become  mealy or break down in prolonged cold storage, so fresh stone fruits are more  seasonal than hardier apples and pears. Like some of the pome fruits, stone fruits  accumulate the indigestible sugar alcohol sorbitol (a frequent ingredient in sugar-  free   gums   and   candies,   p.   662);   they’re   also   rich   in   antioxidant   phenolic  compounds. The seeds of stone fruits are protected by a cyanide-generating  enzyme that also produces the characteristic aroma of almond extract (almonds  are seeds of  Prunus amygdalus ). They thus lend an almond character when included in sugar  and alcohol preserves, and can replace “bitter almonds” in European pastries and  sweets (p. 506).  Apricot   The apricots that are most familiar in the West are fruits of   Prunus  armeniaca,   a native of China that was taken to the Mediterranean during Roman  times. There are now thousands of different varieties, white and red (from  lycopene) as well as orange, and most of them adapted to specific climates;  apricots   flower   and   fruit   early   (the   name   comes   from   the   Latin   praecox,  “precocious”), and therefore bear best in areas with mild, predictable winters.  Several other species are grown in Asia, including   P. mume,   whose fruits the  Japanese   salt-pickle   and   color   red   to   make   the   condiment   umeboshi.   The  distinctive aroma of fresh apricots comes from a rich mixture of terpenes that
provide citrus, herbal, and floral notes, and from peach-like compounds (lactones).  They are rich in pectin, which gives them a luscious texture when fully ripe, a  meaty texture when dried.  Stone fruits and the flower from which they arise. Peaches and cherries derive from an  ovary that sits above the base of the flower parts, so the fruits show no remnants of  the flower.  Apricots are delicate fruits that don’t travel well, so most are processed. They’re  especially suited to drying, which concentrates their sweet-tart flavor well even  when they’re overripe. Most dried apricots in the United States come either from a  few western states or from Turkey, which exports a relatively pale, bland variety  with half the carotenoid pigments and acidity of the Blenheim and Patterson  varieties of California. The fruits are dried in the sun in early summer for one or two  weeks, until they reach a moisture content of 15–20%. Usually they’re treated with  sulfur dioxide to preserve the abundant beta-carotene and other carotenoids,  vitamin C, and fresh flavor. Unsulfured apricots are brown and have a flatter,  cooked taste.  Cherry   Cherries come in two basic types from two different species, both of which  are native to western Asia and southeast Europe. Sweet cherries are the fruits of  Prunus avium,   which is probably one of the parents of the sour cherry,   Prunus  cerasus.   Sweet and sour cherries differ mainly in their maximum sugar content,  with sweet cherries accumulating significantly more. Cherries don’t improve once  they’re harvested, so they must be picked ripe and fragile. Most sweet cherries  grown in the United States are sold fresh, but far more sour cherries are grown, and  most of these are processed. Cherries are prized not only for their flavor, but for  their color, which may range from very deep red (rich in anthocyanins) to a pale
yellow. The red varieties are an excellent source of phenolic antioxidants.  Cherry flavor comes mainly from almondy benzaldehyde, a flowery terpene  (linalool), and essence of clove (eugenol). Heating increases both the almond and  flowery notes, especially if the pits are left in the fruit. This is why the classic French  cherry clafoutis, a custardy tart, is intensely flavored but requires care in eating!  The familiar “maraschino” cherry originated several centuries ago in northeastern  Italy and the neighboring Balkans, where the local marasca cherry was preserved  in its own liqueur for winter eating. In the modern industrial version, light-fleshed  varieties are bleached with sulfur dioxide and stored in brine until needed, then  infused with sugar syrup, dyed cherry red, flavored with almond extract, and  pasteurized. After all that, what’s left of the original cherry is mainly its skeleton,  the cell walls and skin.  Peach and Nectarine   Peaches and nectarines are both fruits of the species   Prunus  persica.   Nectarines are varieties with a smooth skin that are usually also smaller,  firmer, and more aromatic than their fuzzy siblings. The words “peach” and “persica”  come from “Persia,” by way of which the fruit reached the Mediterranean world  from China by about 300   BCE .  Modern peach and nectarine varieties fall into a handful of categories. Their flesh  may be white or yellow, and either firm or melting, strongly attached to the large  central stone (clingstone) or easily detached (freestone). The genetically dominant  characteristics are white, melting, freestone flesh. Yellow varieties were developed  mainly after 1850, and firm clingstone varieties have been bred mainly for drying,  canning, and improved tolerance of shipping and handling. The yellow coloration  comes from a handful of carotenoid pigments, beta-carotene among them; rarer  red varieties contain anthocyanins (as the skin often does). Peaches begin to ripen  at the stem end and along the groove, or “suture,” and are said to continue their  flavor development even after harvest. The distinctively aromatic flavor of peaches  and nectarines comes largely from compounds called lactones, which are also  responsible for the aroma of coconut; some varieties also contain clove-like  eugenol.  The most frequent problem with peaches is mealy flesh, apparently due to  impaired pectin breakdown when the fruit has been temporarily stored in the cold,  at temperatures below about 45ºF/8ºC. This is especially common in supermarket  fruits.
Plum and Plum Hybrids   Most plums are the fruits of two species of   Prunus.   A  Eurasian species,   P. domestica,   gave rise to the European plums, which include  French and Italian prune plums, the greengage and Reine Claude, the yellow-egg  and imperatrice. The most common of these are the prune types, purplish-blue  ovals with a meaty, semimelting, semifreestone flesh. The second, Asian species,   P.  salicina,   originated in China, was improved in Japan, and further bred by Luther  Burbank and others in the United States after 1875. Varieties of the Asian species  (Santa Rosa, elephant heart, and many others) tend to be larger, rounder, from  yellow to red to purple, clingstone, and often melting. European plums are usually  dried or made into preserves, Asian plums eaten fresh. Plums are climacteric fruit,  so they can be harvested before ripening, stored at 32ºF/0ºC for up to 10 days, and  then allowed to mature slowly at 55ºF/13ºC. Their aroma varies from kind to kind,  but generally includes almondy benzaldehyde, flowery linalool, peachy lactones,  and spicy methyl cinnamate.  Plum-apricot hybrids, known as pluots (more plum parentage) or plumcots (equal  parentage), are generally sweeter than plums and more complex in aroma. There  are also a number of minor plums, among them the English damson and sloe ( P.  insititia   and   spinosa ), the latter small, astringent fruits that are steeped to make  sloe gin.  Prunes   The firm-fleshed prune plums dry well in the sun or during 18–24 hours in a  dehydrator at around 175ºF/79ºC. They develop a rich flavor thanks to the  concentration   of   sugars   and   acids   —   nearly   50%   and   5%   of   their   weight  respectively — and to browning reactions that generate caramel and roasted  notes as well as their color, a brown-black deep enough to be attractive rather than  drab. This richness is the reason that prunes work well in many savory meat dishes.  Prunes are such a concentrated source of antioxidant phenolic compounds (up to  150 mg per 100 gm) that they make an excellent natural flavor stabilizer: they  prevent the development of warmed-over flavor in ground meats when included  at the rate of just a few percent (1 tablespoon per pound). They’re also rich in  moisture-retaining fiber and sorbitol and so are used to replace fat in hamburgers  and a variety of baked foods. (Dried cherries have many similar properties and  uses.) Their well-known laxative action on the human digestive tract is not entirely  understood but probably involves the sugar alcohol sorbitol (p. 662), which  accounts for up to 15% of the weight of both prune and juice. We can’t digest  sorbitol, so it passes into our intestines where it may have a number of stimulating
effects.  Berries, Including Grapes and Kiwi Fruit  Though the term   berry   has a precise botanical definition, in common usage it  generally refers to small fruits borne on bushes and low plants, not trees. Most of  our familiar berries are natives of northern woodlands.  Common berries. Blueberries (left) are true berries, or single fruits derived from the  plant’s ovaries. Caneberries and strawberries are not true berries, but multiple fruits  that develop from many ovaries set in the same flower receptacle. Each little segment  of a raspberry or blackberry (center) is a complete stone fruit. The strawberry (right) is  a “false fruit”: the small “seeds” borne on the surface of the swollen flower base are dry  but entire fruits that correspond to the caneberry segments.  Caneberries: Blackberries, Raspberries, and Relatives   Caneberries are fruits of  the genus   Rubus,   which grows naturally across most of the temperate northern  hemisphere in the form of long thin, thorny stalks, or canes. There are hundreds of  species of blackberry native to both Europe and the Americas, but just a few  species of raspberry. Serious caneberry cultivation probably began around 1500,  and a number of blackberry-raspberry hybrids have been created, including  boysenberry, loganberry, youngberry, and tayberry from American species, the  Bedford   giant   from   European   species.   Less   familiar   caneberries   include  cloudberries, a yellow-orange Scandinavian fruit, and dark red, intensely aromatic  Arctic bramble fruits.  Caneberries are composite fruits: a single flower has from 50 to 150 ovaries, and  each ovary makes a separate small fruitlet, like a miniature plum with a stony seed.  The fruitlets are nourished through contact with the flower base and held together
by the entanglement of small hairs borne on their surface (the original inspiration  for Velcro). When they ripen, blackberries separate from the cane at the bottom of  the flower base, so the base comes with the fruit; raspberries instead separate from  the base itself, and so have an inner cavity. Caneberries are climacteric fruit, and  have one of the highest respiration rates of any fruit; thanks to this and their thin  skin, they’re extremely fragile and perishable.  Some Caneberry Relationships  All caneberries are members of the prolific genus   Rubus,   a member of the rose  family.  Raspberry, European   Rubus idaeus vulgatus  Raspberry, American   R. idaeus strigosus  Raspberry, black (American)   R. occidentalis  Blackberry, European   R. fruticosus  Blackberry, American   R. ursinus, laciniatus, vitifolius,  etc.  Dewberry, European   R. caesius  Dewberry, American   R. flagellaris, trivialis  Boysenberry, loganberry, marionberry,  olallieberry, youngberry  Various blackberry-raspberry  crosses  Cloudberry   R. chamaemorus  Salmonberry   R. spectabilis  Arctic bramble   R. arcticus  Raspberries have a distinctive flavor due to a compound dubbed the raspberry  ketone,   and   also   have   a   violet-like   note   (from   carotenoid   fragments   called  ionones). The flavor of wild berries has been found to be by far the most intense.  Blackberries   vary   in   their   flavor,   the   European   varieties   relatively   mild,   the  American more intense, with spicy aroma notes (from terpenes). Most caneberry  colors are provided by anthocyanin pigments, whose sensitivity to pH can cause
dark purple blackberries to turn red when frozen (p. 281). These fruits are a good  source of phenolic antioxidants, at least one of which (ellagic acid) actually  increases during jam making. When made into preserves, the numerous caneberry  seeds (several thousand per quarter pound/100 gm) can sometimes absorb syrup,  become translucent, and give the normally deep-colored jam a milky dullness.  Blueberry, Cranberry, and Relatives   These berries are borne by several different  species in the genus   Vaccinium,   which ranges across northern Europe and North  America.  Blueberry   Blueberries are the small fruits of a bushy North American species of the  genus   Vaccinium,   which ranges from the tropics to the arctic.   V. angustifolium   and  corymbosum   are weedy pioneers in burned fields, and their fruits were gathered  from the wild until the 1920s, when the first selected “highbush” ( corymbosum )  plants were developed in New Jersey. The bilberry,   V. myrtillus,   is a European  relative, and the rabbit-eye blueberry,   V. ashei,   a similar but less flavorful native of  the southern United States. The huckleberry, various species of   Vaccinium,   has a  few large hard seeds, while blueberries have many small ones.  Blueberries have a distinctive, spicy aroma apparently due to several terpenes, and  are rich in phenolic antioxidants and in anthocyanin pigments, especially in the  skin. These small berries freeze well, and retain their shape and substance when  baked. The pigments can turn odd shades of green if cooked with alkaline  ingredients (for example, baking soda in muffins).  Cranberry and Relatives   Cranberries are fruits of the North American perennial  vine   Vaccinium macrocarpon,   which is native to low, swampy areas of northern  states from New England to the Midwest. Cultivation and efforts at improvement  began in the 19th century, and the familiar jelly-like cranberry sauce was born  early in the 20th century when a large producer decided to process his damaged  berries into a canned puree.  Cranberries can be harvested dry, with a comb-like machine, or wet, by flooding  the bog. Dry-harvested berries keep better, for several months. Cranberries store  well for a couple of reasons. One is their high acidity, exceeded only by lemons and  limes, and the main obstacle to eating them straight. The other is their very high  content of phenolic compounds (up to 200 milligrams per 100 grams), some of  which are antimicrobial and probably protect the fruit in its damp habitat. Many of  these phenolic materials are also useful to us, some as antioxidants and others as
antimicrobials. One example is benzoic acid, now a common preservative in  prepared foods. A particular pigment precursor in cranberries (also found in  blueberries) prevents bacteria from adhering to various tissues in the human body,  and so helps prevent urinary tract infections.  The spicy aroma of cranberries is created by a combination of terpenes and spicy  phenolic derivatives (cinnamates, benzoates, vanillin, almondy benzaldehyde).  Some of its phenolic compounds contribute a notable astringency. Cranberries are  rich in pectin, which is why a barely cooked puree thickens immediately into a  sauce; it’s also why cranberries macerated in alcohol may cause the alcohol to gel.  Lingonberries or cowberries are the fruit of a European relative of the cranberry,   V.  vitis-idaea ; they have a distinctive, complex flavor. The European cranberry,   V.  oxycoccus,   has a stronger and more grassy, herbaceous flavor than the American  species.  Currants and Gooseberries   Currants and gooseberries are all species of the genus  Ribes,   which is found in northern Europe and North America. These small berries  don’t appear to have been cultivated until around 1500. (Their cultivation in the  United States has been retarded by federal and state restrictions because they can  harbor a disease that attacks white pines.) There are white and red currants,   R.  sativum   and   R. rubrum,   and hybrids between the two. The black currant   R. nigrum,  is higher in acid than the others, and has a distinctively intense aroma made up of  many spicy terpenes, fruity esters, and a musky, “catty” sulfur compound that is  also found in sauvignon blanc wines. Black currants are also notably rich in vitamin  C and in antioxidant phenolic compounds — as much as 1% of their weight —  about a third of which are anthocyanin pigments. Currants are mainly made into  preserves, and the French make black currants into a liqueur,   crème de cassis.  The gooseberry,   R. grossularia,   is larger than the currant, and is often picked unripe  for cooking in tarts and sauces. The jostaberry is a black currant–gooseberry cross.  Grapes   Grapes are the berries of woody vines in the genus   Vitis. V. vinifera,   the  major source of wine and table grapes, is native to Eurasia (p. 772). There are also  about 10 grape species native to temperate Asia, and 25 to North America,  including the   V. labrusca   that gives us Concord and Catawba grapes. About two-  thirds of the world’s grape production goes to make wine; of the rest, about two-  thirds are eaten fresh and a third are made into raisins. There are many thousands  of grape varieties. Most wine varieties originated in Europe, while varieties for
eating fresh or making into raisins can often be traced back to western Asian  parents. Wine grapes come in relatively small clusters and are acidic enough to  help control the yeast fermentation; table grapes come in large clusters and are  less tart; raisin varieties have a thin skin, high sugar content, and loose cluster  structure to facilitate drying. The commonest table and raisin grape in the United  States, the Thompson seedless or sultana, is a variant of an ancient Middle Eastern  all-purpose variety, the Kishmish. Table grapes are quite diverse. They may be  seedy or seedless, deep purple with anthocyanins or pale yellow; their sugar  content may range from 14 to 25%, their acidity from 0.4 to 1.2%. They may have a  fairly neutral, green aroma (Thompson seedless), or be flowery and citrusy from  terpenes (muscat), or musky with anthranilate and other esters (Concord and other  American varieties). Most commercial varieties today have been bred to be  seedless, crisp, tart, and sweet, with a long storage life. Thompson seedless grapes  picked in the cool of the morning and treated with antimicrobial sulfur dioxide can  be held for as long as two months at 32ºF/0ºC.  Raisins   Grapes are easily preserved by sundrying to make raisins. In the United  States this is usually done by laying the grapes on paper between rows in the  vineyard for about three weeks. Raisins are naturally brown and have caramel  flavor notes due to a combination of browning-enzyme oxidation of phenolic  compounds and direct browning reactions between sugars and amino acids (pp.  269, 778). Both of these processes are accelerated by high temperatures, so a  lighter color can be obtained by drying the grapes in the shade. Golden raisins are  made by treating the grapes with antioxidant sulfur dioxide and drying them  mechanically at controlled temperatures and humidities; the result is a much  fruitier, lighter flavor. Zante “currants” are made from the small black Corinth grape,  and are tarter than ordinary raisins thanks to their higher proportion of skin to  pulp.  Verjus and Saba   Two ancient grape preparations make versatile ingredients in the  kitchen. Fruits thinned six to eight weeks before the main harvest are crushed and  filtered to produce   verjus,   a tart alternative to vinegar or lemon juice, slightly  sweet, with a delicate green aroma. And ripe grapes are cooked down to a thick,  sweet-tart, aromatic syrup (Roman   sapa,   Italian   saba   or   mosto cotto,   Turkish  pekmez,   Arab   dibs ). Like syrups from other fruit (pomegranates), grape syrup was  an important sweetener in the times before cheap table sugar, but provides  tartness and aroma as well as sweetness. It’s thought that balsamic vinegar may
have evolved from grape syrup that was kept long enough to ferment (p. 775).  Kiwi   “Kiwi” fruit is the name that New Zealand producers came up with for the  striking, tart berry of a Chinese vine,   Actinidia deliciosa,   when they pioneered its  international marketing in the 1970s. Several other species of   Actinidia   are now  also cultivated, including the yellow-to-red-fleshed   A. chinensis.   Kiwi fruit are  unusual in appearance and ripening behavior. Their thin, hairy skin doesn’t change  color during ripening, and the translucent inner flesh is green with chlorophyll,  with as many as 1,500 small black seeds embedded in a ring and connected to the  core by white rays of vascular tissue. (There are also chlorophyll-free varieties with  yellow, red, and purple flesh.) Cross-sectional slices of kiwi are thus very attractive.  When harvested, kiwi fruits contain a large amount of starch. During months of  storage at 32ºF/0ºC, the starch is slowly converted to sweet sugars. Then at room  temperature they undergo a climacteric ripening that takes about 10 days. The  flesh softens and the aroma becomes more pronounced, with strongly fruity esters  (benzoates, butanoates) coming to dominate more delicate, grassy alcohols and  aldehydes. Some kiwi varieties are rich in vitamin C and in carotenoids.  Kiwi fruits present a couple of challenges to the cook. They contain a strong  protein-digesting enzyme, actinidin, which can damage other ingredients in a  mixture and irritate sensitive skin. Heat inactivates enzymes, but it also muddies  the fruit’s delicate color and translucency. Kiwi fruits also contain crystals of  calcium oxalate (p. 259), which pureeing, juicing, and drying can make more  apparent and irritating in the mouth and throat.  Mulberry   Mulberries are the surprisingly small, fragile, composite fruits of trees of  the genus   Morus.   They resemble the blackberry, but each small fruitlet actually  arises from a separate flower on a short flowering stalk. The white mulberry,   M.  alba,   is native to China, where its leaves have long been used to feed silkworms. Its  color ranges from white to purple, and it is relatively bland; often it’s dried, which  helps intensify its flavor. The Persian or black species,   M. nigra,   comes from west  Asia; it’s always a dark purple and is more flavorful. The North American red  mulberry,   M. rubra,   is mainly tart. Mulberries are used to make preserves, syrups,  and sorbets.  Strawberry   Strawberries come from small perennial plants of the genus   Fragaria,  whose 20 species range across the northern hemisphere. The plants are easy to  grow and therefore are grown widely, from sub-arctic Finland to tropical Ecuador.
The strawberry is unusual in bearing its “seeds” on the surface of the fleshy portion,  not inside. The “seeds” are actually miniature dry fruits (achenes), similar to  buckwheat and sunflower “seeds,” and the fleshy portion is the flower’s swollen  base, not its ovary. During ripening, the cells of the strawberry interior enlarge and  pull apart from each other. The berry is therefore filled with tiny air pockets, and its  shape is maintained by the pressure of the cell contents pushing each cell onto its  neighbors. When this pressure is released, by water loss from drying out or from  freezing that punctures the cell walls, the structure weakens and the fruit becomes  soft and mushy. Strawberries don’t improve once picked, so they must be picked  ripe. Thanks to their thin skin and fragile structure, they only last a few days, even  in cold storage.  Food Words:   Berry, Strawberry  Berry   comes from an Indo-European root meaning “to shine,” perhaps for the  bright colors of many small fruits. The   straw   in   strawberry   comes from a root  for “to spread, to strew.” Straw is the dried stalks strewn about the field after  the grain harvest; perhaps strawberries were named for the plant’s habit of  spreading by means of runners. A related cooking term is   streusel,   an  informally scattered topping on baked goods.  The pineapple note in standard strawberries comes from the presence of ethyl  esters. Some sulfur compounds and a complex caramel-like oxygen-containing  ring, furaneol (also characteristic of pineapple), round out strawberry aroma. The  smaller European woodland strawberries have a flavor of Concord grapes thanks to  anthranilates, and a clove-like spicy note (from the phenolic eugenol). Strawberries  are rich in ascorbic acid and in phenolic antioxidants, including its red anthocyanin  pigments. They are poor in pectic materials, so strawberry preserves are often  supplemented with prepared pectin or pectin-rich fruits.  The Domestication of the Strawberry   Most of the strawberries grown today derive  from two American species which were brought together and hybridized less than  300 years ago — and in Europe, not in the Americas!  Europe had its own native strawberry ( F. vesca   and   F. moschata ), which is now
called the “wild” strawberry or   fraise de bois (“woodland strawberry”), even though  it’s cultivated. This strawberry was mentioned in Roman literature, subsequently  cultivated, and by the 15th century had a wonderful fragrance but was still small,  pithy and unproductive. Early European visitors to North America were impressed  by the size and vigor of an American species,   F. virginiana,   and brought it back to  Europe. Then a Frenchman by the stunningly appropriate name of Frézier found  the walnutsized fruits of another New World species,   F. chiloensis,   growing in Chile,  and took that species to France in 1712. Around 1750, in the strawberry-producing  area   around   Plougastel   in   Britanny,   an   accidental   hybrid   between   the   two  American species arose. Then across the Channel in England, a natural mutant of  the Chilean species arose, large and pink, with a shape and aroma reminiscent of  pineapple. Modern strawberry varieties, large and red and flavorful, derive from  these two all-American ancestors. They have been given the scientific name   F. x  ananassa   to indicate their hybrid origins ( x ) and distinctive pineapple aroma  ( ananassa ).  Elderberry and Barberry   Elderberries and barberries are minor fruits worth  rediscovering. Elderberries are pleasantly aromatic fruits borne by trees of the  genus   Sambucus,   which are found across the northern hemisphere. They’re usually  cooked or made into wine because they are too tart to be enjoyed raw, and  contain antinutritional lectins (p. 259) that require heating to be inactivated.  Elderberries   are   rich   in   anthocyanin   pigments   and   antioxidant   phenolic  compounds. So is the barberry, from shrubby species of the northern-hemisphere  Berberis,   which is something like a miniature cranberry and dries well. Barberries  are much used in Persian cooking, where they provide the tart rubies in a dish  called jeweled rice.  Other Temperate Fruits  Ground Cherry   This is one name for a couple of related fruits from low-lying plants  in the nightshade family, close relatives of the tomatillo (p. 331). The Peruvian or  Cape ground cherry or gooseberry,   Physalis peruviana,   came from South America,  while the ordinary ground cherry,   P. pubescens,   is native to both North and South  America. Both fruits resemble miniature, thick-skinned yellowish tomatoes, are  enclosed in papery husks (thus another name, husk tomato), and keep well at  room temperature. The Peruvian ground cherry has floral and caramel aroma notes  in addition to generically fruity esters. These fruits are made into preserves and
pies.  Persimmon   Persimmons are fruits of trees in the genus   Diospyros,   which is native  to both Asia and North America. There’s a plum-sized native American persimmon,  D. virginiana,   and a Mexican species known as the black sapote ( D. digyna ), but the  most important persimmon species worldwide is   D. kaki,   a tree with applesized  fruits native to China and adopted by Japan; it’s sometimes said that persimmons  are to the Japanese what apples are to Americans. Japanese persimmons are  sweet, low-acid, mild fruits, with a few brown seeds surrounded by flesh that’s  bright orange from various carotenoid pigments, including beta-carotene and  lycopene. They have a very mild aroma reminiscent of winter squash that probably  derives from breakdown products of carotenoids.  Japanese persimmons come in two general kinds, astringent and nonastringent.  Astringent varieties, including the tapered Hachiya, have such high levels of  tannins that they’re edible only when completely ripe, with translucent and almost  liquid flesh. Nonastringent types, including the flat-bottomed Fuyu or Jiro, are not  tannic, and can be eaten while underripe and crisp (they also don’t get as soft as  the astringent types). Centuries ago, the Chinese figured out a way to remove the  astringency from unripe persimmons before they ripen. This method may be the  first example of controlled-atmosphere storage! They simply buried the fruit in  mud for several days. It turns out that when the fruits are deprived of oxygen, they  shift their metabolism in a way that results in the accumulation of an alcohol  derivative called acetaldehyde, and this substance binds with tannins in the cells,  thus   preempting   them   from   binding   to   our   tongues.   Modern   cooks   can  accomplish the same thing by wrapping persimmons snugly in a truly airtight  plastic film, polyvinylidene chloride (saran).  Persimmons are commonly eaten raw, frozen whole into a natural sorbet, and  made into pudding. Traditional American persimmon pudding owes its distinctive  black-brown color to the combination of the fruit’s glucose and fructose, flour and  egg proteins, alkaline baking soda, and hours of cooking, which encourage  extensive browning reactions (p. 778; replace the baking soda with neutral baking  powder or shorten the cooking time and you get a light orange pudding).  Persimmon flesh can be whipped into a long-lived foam thanks to its tannins,  which help bind fragments of cell walls together to stabilize the air pockets. In  Japan, most Hachiya persimmons are dried, massaged every few days to even out  the   moisture   and   break   down   some   of   the   fibrousness   to   a   soft,   doughy
consistency.  Rhubarb   Rhubarb is a vegetable that often masquerades as a fruit. It is the  startlingly sour leaf stalks of a large herb,   Rheum rhabarbarum,   that is native to  temperate Eurasia and became popular in early 19th-century England as one of  the first fruit-like produce items to appear in the early spring. The rhubarb root had  long been used as a cathartic in Chinese medicine, and traded widely as a  medicinal. The stalks were also used as a vegetable in Iran and Afghanistan (in  stews, with spinach) and in Poland (with potatoes). By the 18th century the English  were using them to make sweet pies and tarts. The 19th century brought better  varieties and techniques for digging up mature roots and forcing rapid stalk  growth in warm dark sheds, which produced sweeter, tenderer stalks. These  improvements, cheaper sugar, and a growing supply resulted in a rhubarb boom,  which peaked between the world wars.  Food Words:   Rhubarb  Rhubarb   is a medieval Latin coinage, a combination of Greek   rha   and  barbarum : “rhubarb” and “foreign.”   Rha   also meant the Volga River, so the plant  may have been named after it: it came from foreign lands to the east of the  Volga.  Rhubarb stalks may be red with anthocyanin pigments, green, or an intermediate  shade, depending on the variety and production techniques. Their acidity is due to  a number of organic acids, notably oxalic acid, which contributes about a tenth of  the total acidity of 2–2.5%. (This is double or triple the oxalate content of spinach  and beets.) Rhubarb leaves are said to be toxic in part due to their high oxalate  content, as much as 1% of the leaf weight, but other chemicals are probably also  responsible. Today rhubarb is available much of the year thanks to greenhouse  production, though some cooks prefer the more intense flavor and color of the  field-grown crop of late spring. The color of red stalks is best preserved by  minimizing both the cooking time and the quantity of added liquid, which dilutes  the pigments.
Fruits From Warm Climates: Melons, Citrus Fruits,  Tropical Fruits, and Others  Melons  Except for the watermelon, melons are fruits of   Cucumis melo,   a close relative of the  cucumber ( C. sativus ) and a native of the semiarid subtropics of Asia. The melon  plant was domesticated in central Asia or India and arrived in the Mediterranean at  the beginning of the 1st century   CE , where their large size and rapid growth made  them a common symbol of fertility, abundance, and luxury. There are many melon  varieties with distinctive rinds, flesh colors (orange types are an excellent source of  beta-carotene), textures, aromas, sizes, and keeping qualities.  Melons are generally used fresh, either sliced or pureed. They contain a protein-  digesting enzyme, cucumisin, and thus will prevent gelatin gels from setting  unless the enzyme is denatured by cooking or an excess of gelatin is used. The  melon surface can become contaminated with microbes in the field and cause  food poisoning when the microbes are introduced into the flesh during cutting; it’s  now recommended that melons be thoroughly washed in hot soapy water before  preparing them.  Food Words:   Melon  In Greek,   melon   meant “apple,” but also other fruits containing seeds. The  Greeks called our melon   melopepon,   or “apple-gourd,” and this became  shortened to   melon.  Melon Families and Qualities   The most common Western melons fall into two  families:  •   Summer melons are highly aromatic and perishable, and usually have rough  rinds. They include true cantaloupes and muskmelons.  •   Winter melons are less aromatic and less perishable, and usually have  smooth or wrinkled rinds. They include honeydews, casabas, and canaries.
The differences between the two melon families are caused by differences in their  physiology. The aromatic summer melons are generally climacteric fruits that (with  the exception of cantaloupes) separate from their stems when ripe; and they  contain active enzymes that generate more than 200 different esters from amino  acid precursors, and thus help create their characteristically rich aroma. The winter  melons are generally nonclimacteric fruit like their relatives the cucumbers and  squashes, and have low ester-enzyme activities and therefore a milder flavor.  Vine-ripening is important for all melons because they don’t store starch and so  get no sweeter after harvest. A remnant of the stem on an aromatic melon  indicates that it was harvested before becoming fully ripe, while all winter melons  (and true cantaloupes), even ripe ones, carry a piece of stem. The aroma of melons  may continue to develop off the vine, but will not be the same as the aroma of  vine-ripenedfruit. In addition to fruity esters, melons contain some of the same  green, grassy compounds that give cucumbers their distinctive flavor, as well as  sulfur compounds that provide a deeper, more savory dimension.  Some Melon Varieties  Summer Melons:   very aromatic, keep one to two weeks  Cantaloupe:   smooth or lightly netted, orange flesh, rich flavor (Charentais,  Cavaillon)  Muskmelon:   deeply netted (most U.S. varieties, sometimes misnamed  “cantaloupe”)  Galia, Ha Ogen, Rocky Ford:   green flesh, sweet and aromatic  Ambrosia, Sierra Gold:   orange flesh  Persian:   large, orange, mild  Sharlyn/Ananas:   translucent pale flesh  Pancha (charentais x muskmelon):   netted and ribbed, orange, very  aromatic  Winter Melons:   less aromatic, keep weeks to months  Honeydew:   smooth rind, green or orange flesh, sweet, mild aroma (many
varieties)  Casaba, Santa Claus:   wrinkled or smooth rind, white flesh, less sweet or  aromatic than honeydew  Canary:   slightly wrinkled rind, white flesh, crisp, aromatic  Hybrids  Crenshaw (Persian x casaba):   green-yellow wrinkled rind, orange flesh, juicy,  aromatic  Minor Melons   In addition to the Western melons, there are several groups of Asian  melons, including Japanese pickling or tea melons, many of them crisp-fleshed,  and the   flexuosus   group, long and twisted like a snake, which includes the  “Armenian cucumber.” There is also the   dudaim   group of small, especially musky  melons used in the U.S. South and elsewhere for preserves and simply to scent the  air (pocket melon, pomegranate melon, smell melon);   dudaim   is Hebrew for “love-  plants.” The horned melon, also called jelly melon and kiwano, is the fruit of  Cucumis metuliferus,   a native of Africa with a spiky yellow skin and a relatively scant  amount of emerald-green, translucent gel surrounding its seeds. The gel has a  sweet cucumbery flavor and is used in drinks, fresh sauces, and sorbets. The  hollowed-out skin makes a decorative container.  Watermelon   The watermelon is a distant relative of the other melons, the fruit of  an African vine,   Citrullus lanatus,   whose wild relatives are very bitter. The Egyptians  were eating it 5,000 years ago, and the Greeks knew it by the 4th century   BCE . World  production of watermelons is now double the production of all other melons  combined. Watermelons are notable for the large size both of their cells, which are  easily seen with the naked eye, and their fruits, which can reach 60 lb/30 kg and  more. Unlike other melons, the watermelon consists of seed-bearing placental  tissue rather than seed-surrounding — thus seed-free — ovary wall. “Seedless  melons,” which actually contain small undeveloped seeds, were first bred in Japan  in the 1930s. The classic watermelon is dark red with the carotenoid pigment  lycopene, and in fact is a much richer source of this antioxidant than tomatoes!  Recent years have brought yellow-orange varieties. A good watermelon has a  crunchy, crisp, yet tender consistency, a moderately sweet taste, and a delicate,
almost green aroma. External signs of quality are a substantial heaviness for the  melon’s size, yellow skin under-tones indicative of chlorophyll loss and thus  ripeness, and a solid resonance when thumped.  In addition to being eaten fresh, watermelon flesh is pickled and candied (often  after a preliminary drying), and cooked down into a syrup or thick puree. The  dense rind is often made into sour or sweet preserves. There is a subgroup of  watermelons,   C. lanatus citroides,   known as citron or preserving melons, with  inedible   flesh   but   abundant   rind   for   these   preparations.   Both   melon   and  watermelon seeds are used in several regions, roasted or ground and infused to  make beverages.  Fruits From Arid Climates: Fig, Date, and Others  Cactus Pear   “Cactus pear” is the modern marketing term for “prickly pear” (Spanish  tuna ), the fruit of the American cactus   Opuntia ficus-indica.   The species name  comes from the early European idea that the dried fruit was an “Indian fig.” The  cactus arrived in the Old World in the 16th century and spread like a weed in the  southern Mediterranean and Middle East. While both stem pads and fruits are  eaten in the Americas, Europeans concentrated on the fruits, which ripen in the  summer and fall and have a thick skin, green to red or purple, and many hard seeds  embedded in a reddish, sometimes magenta flesh. The main pigment is not an  anthocyanin but a beet-like betain (p. 268). The aroma is mild, reminiscent of  melons thanks to similar alcohols and aldehydes. Like the pineapple and kiwi,  cactus pears contain a protein-digesting enzyme that can affect gelatin gels unless  it’s inactivated by cooking. The pulp is removed and generally eaten fresh as juice  or in salsas, or boiled down to a syrup or further to a pasty consistency. The paste is  made into candies and cakes with flour and nuts.  Dates   Dates are the sweet, easily dried fruits of a desert palm,   Phoenix dactylifera,  that can tolerate some cold and thrives as long as it has a source of water. Their  original home was Middle Eastern and African oases, where they were being  cultivated with artificial irrigation and pollination more than 5,000 years ago;  they’re now also grown in Asia and California. Though we usually see only two or  three dried versions, there are thousands of different date varieties that differ in  size, shape, color, flavor, and ripening schedule.  Growers and aficionados distinguish four stages in date development: green and
immature; mature but unripe, when they’re yellow or red and hard, crunchy, and  astringent; ripe (Arabic   rhutab ), when they’re soft, golden brown, and delicate; and  finally dried, when they’re brown and wrinkled and powerfully sweet. Drying is  usually done on the tree. Dates are moist and succulent when fresh, from 50 to  90% water, and chewy and concentrated when dry, with less than 20% moisture.  Dry dates are 60 to 80% sugar, together with some texture-providing pectins and  other cell-wall materials, and a few percent fatty materials, including the surface  wax. They’re ground into a coarse powder to make “date sugar.”  The drying process causes dates to develop a brown color and browned flavor  thanks both to the action of browning enzymes on phenolic materials, and to the  browning reactions between concentrated sugars and amino acids. Some varieties  rich in phenolic materials, notably the Deglet Noor, can develop an increased  astringency and red coloration when heated. Phenolic and other compounds give  dates notable antioxidant and antimutagenic activities.  Fig   Figs are the fruits of   Ficus carica,   a tree native to the Mediterranean and Middle  East, and a relative of the mulberry. Because like the date they readily dry in the  sun to a long-keeping, concentrated source of nourishment, they have been an  important human food for many thousands of years. The fig is the fruit mentioned  most often in the Bible, and was said to grow in the Garden of Eden. Spanish  explorers brought it to the Americas via Mexico, and it now grows in many dry  subtropical regions. There are many varieties, some green-skinned and some  purple, some with bright red interiors. Ripe fresh figs are 80% water, very fragile  and perishable. The vast bulk of the world crop is preserved by drying, a process  that normally begins on the tree and then concludes on the orchard floor or in  mechanical dryers.  The fig is unusual in being more flower than fruit. The main body is a fleshy flower  base folded in on itself, with an open pore opposite the stem, and inner female  florets that develop into small, individual dry fruits that crunch like “seeds.” The  florets are pollinated by tiny wasps that enter through the pore. Many fig varieties  will set fruit without pollination and produce “seeds” with no embryo inside, but fig  experts say that fertilization and seed development seem to generate different  flavors. (Wasps carry microbes into the fig interior, so fertilized fruits also suffer  greater spoilage.) Smyrna figs and their descendants (“Calimyrna” is the California  version) will not set fruit unless fertilized. They must be grown alongside a separate  and inedible crop of “caprifigs,” from which the wasps obtain fig pollen and lay
their eggs.  The walls of the fig fruit contain latex vessels that carry a protein-digesting  enzyme, ficin, and tannin cells that contribute astringency. Figs are remarkable for  containing   very   large   amounts   of   phenolic   compounds,   some   of   them  antioxidants, and large amounts of calcium for a fruit. When ripe, figs have a  unique aroma that comes mainly from spicy phenolic compounds and a flowery  terpene (linalool).  The fig. It contains small flowers within the fleshy “fruit,” which is actually the swollen  flower base. The fig is an inverted version of the strawberry: it surrounds rather than  underlies the true tiny fruits, or achenes.  Jujube   Jujubes, also known as Chinese dates, are the fruits of   Ziziphus jujuba,   a tree  native to central Asia. They do bear some resemblance to dates, as do the version  known in India as the ber ( Z. mauritania ). Both trees tolerate heat and drought and  are now grown in arid regions throughout the world. Jujubes are small, somewhat  dry and spongy, more sweet than tart. They’re an excellent source of vitamin C,  containing more than double the amount in an equal weight of oranges. They’re  eaten fresh, dried, pickled, in rice-based cakes, and fermented into alcoholic drinks.  Pomegranate   Pomegranates are fruits of the shrubby tree   Punica granatum,   a  native of the arid and semiarid regions of the Mediterranean and western Asia; the  finest varieties are said to grow in Iran. With their dull, dry rind surrounding two  layered chambers of translucent, ruby-like fruitlets (there are also pale and yellow  varieties), they figured very early in mythology and art. Pomegranate-shaped  goblets   have been   found in   prehistoric Troy, and in   Greek   myth   it was a
pomegranate   that   tempted   Persephone   and   kept   her   in   the   underworld.  Pomegranates are very sweet, fairly tart, and often astringent thanks to their  strongly pigmented juice well-stuffed with anthocyanins and related phenolic  antioxidants. Juice manufactured by crushing whole fruits is much more tannic  than the fruitlets themselves; the rind is so rich in tannins that it was once used for  tanning leather! Because each fruitlet contains a prominent seed, pomegranates  are usually processed into juice, which then can be used as is or cooked down to  make   a   syrup   or “molasses,” or   fermented   into   a   wine.   True   grenadine   is  pomegranate   juice   mixed   with   a   hot   sugar   syrup. Today   most   commercial  grenadines are synthetic. In northern India, pomegranate fruitlets are dried and  ground for use as an acidifying powder.  Food Words:   Date, Pomegranate  Date   comes from the Greek word for “finger,”   daktulos,   which the elongated  fruits resemble.   Pomegranate   comes from medieval French, and is a  combination of Latin roots meaning “apple” and “grainy” or “seedy.”  The Citrus Family: Orange, Lemon, Grapefruit, and Relatives  Citrus fruits are among the most important of all tree fruits. From their birthplace  insouthern China, northern India, and Southeast Asia they spread throughout the  subtropics and mild temperate zones of the world. Ancient trade took the citron to  western Asia and the Middle East before 500   BCE , and medieval crusaders brought  sour   oranges   back   with   them   to   Europe;   Genoese   and   Portuguese   traders  introduced sweet oranges around 1500, and Spanish explorers carried them to the  Americas. Today, Brazil and the United States produce most of the world’s oranges.  Barely a century ago, oranges were special holiday treats; now much of the  Western world starts its day with orange juice.  Why are citrus fruits so popular? They offer an unusual set of virtues. Above all,  their peels have distinctive and strong aromas, and these may have been their  original attraction, well before human selection developed varieties with sweet  juices. The improved varieties do have a refreshing, tart to sweet-tart juice that can
be extracted with little pulp. The peel is rich in gel-making pectins. And citrus fruits  are also fairly robust. They’re nonclimacteric, so they retain their quality for some  time after harvest, and the meaty peel offers good protection against physical  damage and attack by spoilage microbes.  Citrus anatomy. The protective outer rind includes aromatic oil glands embedded in a  bitter white pith, the albedo. Each segment, or carpel, of a citrus fruit consists of many  delicate juice sacs contained within a strong membrane.  Citrus Anatomy   Each segment of a citrus fruit is a compartment of the ovary, and  is stuffed with small, elongated bags called   vesicles,   each of which contains many  individual microscopic juice cells that fill with water and dissolved substances as  the fruit develops. Surrounding the segments is a thick, white, spongy layer called  the   albedo,   usually rich in both bitter substances and in pectin. And riding atop the  albedo is the skin, a thin, pigmented layer with tiny spherical glands that create  and store volatile oils. Flexing a piece of citrus peel will burst the oil glands and  send a visible, aromatic — and flammable! — spray into the air.  Citrus Color and Flavor   Citrus fruits owe their yellow and orange colors ( orange  comes ultimately from the Sanskrit word for the fruit) to a complex mixture of  carotenoids, only a small portion of which has vitamin A activity. The fruit peels  start out green, and in the tropics often stay that way even when the fruit ripens. In  other regions, cold temperatures trigger destruction of chlorophyll in the peel, and
the carotenoids become visible. Fruits of commerce are often picked green and  treated with ethylene to improve their color, and coated with an edible wax to  slow moisture loss. Pink and red grapefruit are colored by lycopene, and red sweet  oranges by a mixture of lycopene and beta-carotene and by cryptoxanthin. The  purple-red of blood oranges comes from anthocyanins.  The taste of citrus fruits is created by a handful of substances, including citric acid  (so named because it is typical of the family), sugars, and certain bitter phenolic  compounds, which are usually concentrated in the albedo and peel. Citrus fruits  are surprisingly rich in the savory amino acid glutamate, sometimes rivaling the  tomato (oranges reach 70 milligrams per 100 grams, grapefruits 250). They contain  little starch and therefore don’t sweeten much after picking. Usually the blossom  end of the fruit contains both more acid and more sugars, and so has a more  intense taste than the stem end. Neighboring segments can also vary significantly  in taste.  Citrus aroma is produced both by the oil glands in the skin and oil droplets in the  juice vesicles — and these two sources are usually quite distinct. Generally the  vesicle oils contain more fruity esters, and peel oil more green aldehydes and  citrusy/spicy terpenes (p. 274). A few aroma compounds are shared by most citrus  fruit, including generically citrusy limonene and small amounts of eggy hydrogen  sulfide. In freshly made juice, the sac oil droplets gradually aggregate with the  pulpy materials, and this aggregation reduces the aroma available to the taster,  especially if some of the pulp is strained off.  Citrus Peel   The intensely flavored citrus peel has long been used to flavor dishes  (for example, dried orange peel in Sichuan cooking), and as a preparation in itself  in the form of candied rind. The outer epidermis contains the aromatic oil glands,  while the underlying white, spongy, pectinrich albedo usually contains protective  bitter phenolic substances. Both the oil with its terpenes and the antioxidant  phenolics are valuable phytochemicals (pp. 256, 257). The bitters are water-soluble,  while the oils are not. Cooks can therefore leach the peel repeatedly with hot  (rapid) or cold (slow) water to remove the bitter compounds, then gently cook the  peel if still necessary to soften the albedo, and finally infuse it with a concentrated  sugar syrup. Through all this processing the water-insoluble oils stay largely in the  rind.   Marmalade,   a sugar preserve that includes citrus peel, was originally a  Portuguese fruit paste made with quince, but by the 18th century the high-pectin,  readily gelled sour orange had begun to replace the quince. Marmalade made with
sweet oranges doesn’t gel as readily and lacks the characteristic flavor, including a  bitterness that helps balance the sugar.  As is true for most fruits, the skin of citrus fruits is more easily removed from the  underlying tissue by briefly immersing the fruit in simmering water. Thick citrus  rinds require an immersion of several minutes. Heat softens the cell-wall cement  that attaches rind to fruit, and may also encourage some enzymes to begin to  dissolve the cement.  Flavor Notes in Some Citrus Fruits  The chemicals listed in the first five flavor headings are terpenes, which are  especially characteristic of citrus fruits and some herbs and spices (p. 390).  Fruit  Citrus  ( limonene )  Pine  pinene )  Herbaceous  ( terpinene )  Lemony  (neral/  geranial )  Flowery  ( linalool  etc.)  Waxy,  peel  ( decanal ,  octenol )  Musky  (sulfur  compounds)  Thyme  (thymol)  Spicy  (other  terpe-  noids )   Others  Orange,  sweet  +   +   +   +   +   +   +   cooked  marmalade  ( valencene ,  sinensal)  Orange,  sour  +   +   +  Orange,  blood  +   +   +   ( valencene )  Mandarin  ( tangerine )  +   +   +   +   +   +  Lemon   +   +   +  Lemon,  Meyer  +   +   +  Lime   +   +   +   +  Citron   +   +   +  Grapefruit   +   +   +   +   +   (sinensal)  Yuzu   +   +   +   +   +   +  Makrut   +  lime leaf  Bergamot   +   +   +   +  Kinds of Citrus Fruits   Trees in the genus   Citrus   are wonderfully variable and prone  to form hybrids with each other, which makes it a challenge for scientists to work  out family relationships. Currently it’s thought that the common domesticated  citrus fruits all derive from just three parents: the citron   Citrus medica,   the  mandarin orange   Citrus reticulata,   and the pummelo   Citrus grandis.   At least one  offspring is relatively young: the grapefruit apparently originated in the West
Indies in the 18th century as a cross between the pummelo and the sweet orange.  Citron   Perhaps the first citrus fruit to reach the Middle East around 700   BCE   and the  Mediterranean around 300   BCE , citrons are native to the Himalayan foothills. They  gave their name to the genus, and their name came in turn from their resemblance  to the cone of a Mediterranean evergreen cedar (Greek   kedros ). The several  varieties have little juice, but an intensely aromatic rind that can perfume a room  — citrons are used in both Asian and Jewish religious ceremonies — and that has  long been candied (p. 295). In China’s Sichuan province, the rind is made into a hot  pickle.  Mandarin, or Tangerine   Mandarin oranges were cultivated in ancient India and  China at least 3,000 years ago. The well-known Japanese type, the satsuma,  appeared by the 16th century, and Mediterranean types (“tangerines,” from the  Moroccan city of Tangier) in the 19th century. Mandarins tend to be relatively small  and flat, with a reddish, easily peeled rind and a distinctive, rich aroma that has  notes of thyme and Concord grape (thymol, methyl anthranilate). They’re the most  cold-hardy of citrus trees, yet the fruits are fairly fragile. Satsumas are seedless and  commonly processed into canned segments.  Pummelo   Pummelos require the warmest growing conditions of the common  citrus fruits and have been slow to spread from their home in tropical Asia, where  they were cultivated in ancient times. They’re large, 10 in/25 cm or more in  diameter, with a relatively thick albedo layer; large, easily separated juice vesicles  that burst in the mouth; thick and tough segment membranes; and an absence of  the bitterness that flavors its offspring the grapefruit. Some varieties have pink-red  vesicles.  Orange   Nearly three-fourths of all citrus fruit produced in the world are oranges,  whose juiciness and moderate size, sweetness, and acidity make them especially  versatile. They’re probably an ancient hybrid between the mandarin and the  pummelo, and have in turn been developed into several very different kinds of  fruit.  Navel   oranges probably originated in China, but became a major commodity  worldwide when a Brazilian variety arrived in the United States in 1870. The navel-  like appearance of their blossom end is caused by the development of a small  secondary set of segments. Navels are the ideal orange for eating fresh because  they’re seedless and easily peeled. However, the trees are finicky to grow, and their
juice contains fewer fruity esters than the best juice varieties. And juice made from  navel oranges will become noticeably bitter after about 30 minutes. This happens  because when the juice cells are broken and their contents mixed, acids and  enzymes convert a tasteless precursor molecule into an intensely bitter terpene  compound called limonin.  Citrus Family Relationships  The Parent Species  Citron   Citrus medica  Mandarin,  tangerine  Citrus reticulata  Pummelo   Citrus grandis  Their Offspring  Sour orange   Citrus aurantium  Sweet orange   Citrus sinensis,   pummelo x mandarin(?)  Grapefruit   Citrus paradisi,   pummelo x sweet orange  Sour lime   Citrus aurantifolia  Persian/Tahiti lime   Citrus latifolia,   sour lime x citron(?)  Lemon   Citrus limon,   citron x sour lime x  pummelo(?)  Meyer lemon   Citrus limon,   lemon x mandarin or sweet  orange?  Modern Hybrids  Tangelo   Citrus   x   tangelo,   tangerine x grapefruit  Tangor   Citrus   x   nobilis,   tangerine x sweet orange  Common   or   juice   oranges have a smooth blossom end, generally contain seeds,
and have a more adherent skin than navel oranges. Commercial orange juice is  made from juice varieties with little tendency to develop limonin bitterness. The  mild flavor of the juice is usually augmented by the addition of peel oils.  Blood   oranges have been grown in the southern Mediterranean at least since the  18th century, and may have originated there or in China. They’re now the major  type of orange grown in Italy. Blood oranges owe the deep maroon color of their  juice to anthocyanin pigments, which develop only when night temperatures are  low, in the Mediterranean autumn and winter. The pigments tend to accumulate at  the blossom end and in vesicles immediately next to the segment walls, and  continue to accumulate after harvest when the fruits are held in cold storage. The  pigments and their phenolic precursors give blood oranges a higher antioxidant  value than other oranges. The unique flavor of blood oranges combines citrus  notes with a distinct raspberry-like aroma.  Acidless   oranges are grown in small numbers in north Africa, Europe, and South  America, and have about a tenth the acidity — and less orange aroma — of  common and navel oranges.  Sour   oranges come from a different species than the kinds described above, and  are both sour and bitter (thanks not to limonin but a related compound,  neohesperidin), with an intense and distinctive peel aroma. They arrived in Spain  and Portugal in the 12th century, and soon displaced quince as the main  ingredient in marmalade. Sour-orange flowers are used to make orange flower  water.  Grapefruit   The grapefruit originated as a hybrid of the sweet orange and  pummelo in the Caribbean in the 18th century, and is still mainly grown in the  Americas. The red types owe their color to lycopene, and first appeared as chance  mutations in Florida and in Texas early in the 20th century (the more recent and  popular Star Ruby and Rio Red varieties were created by intentionally inducing  mutations with radiation). Unlike the anthocyanin coloration of blood oranges,  grapefruit lycopene requires consistent high growing temperatures to develop  well, appears evenly through all the juice vesicles, and is stable to heat. The  characteristic moderate bitterness is caused by a phenolic substance called  naringin, whose concentration declines as the fruit ripens. Like navel oranges,  grapefruits also contain a precursor of limonin, and its juice becomes bitter on  standing. Some grapefruit phenolic compounds turn out to interfere with our
metabolism of certain drugs, cause the drugs to persist longer in the body, and  thus cause the equivalent of an overdose, so medicine labels sometimes warn  against consuming grapefruit or its juice along with the medicine. (These same  phenolics are now being developed into activity-boosting drug ingredients.)  Grapefruits have an especially complex aroma, which includes meaty and musky  sulfur compounds.  Lime   Limes are the most acidic of the citrus fruits, as much as 8% of their weight  coming from citric acid. The small, seedy Mexican or Key lime,   C. aurantifolia,   is the  standard sour citrus fruit in the tropics, where lemons don’t grow well. In western  Asia it’s sun-dried whole, then ground and used as an aromatic, somewhat musty  acidifier. The larger, seedless, more cold-tolerant Persian or Tahiti or Bearss lime,   C.  latifolia,   may be a hybrid between the true lime and citron, and is more common in  the United States and Europe. Despite the general impression that limes are  characteristically “lime-green,” both turn pale yellow when fully ripe. They owe  their distinctive limeness to pine, floral, and spicy aroma notes (from terpenes).  Lemon   Lemons may have originated as a two-step hybrid, the first (citron crossed  with lime) arising in the area of northwest India and Pakistan, the second ([citron  crossed with lime] crossed with pummelo) in the Middle East. Lemons arrived in  the Mediterranean around 100   CE , were planted in orchards in Moorish Spain by  400, and are now mainly cultivated in subtropical regions. They’re valued for their  acidity, often 5% of the juice, and their fresh, bright aroma, which is the base for  many popular fresh and bottled drinks. There are many varieties of true lemon, and  also a couple of further hybrids. The large, coarse Ponderosa variety is probably a  lemon-citron cross, and the Meyer lemon, a thin-skinned, less acid version brought  to California in the early 20th century, is probably a cross between the lemon and  either orange or mandarin, with a distinctive flavor due in part to a thyme note  (from thymol). Lemons are generally “cured” for better shelf life; they’re picked  green and held in controlled conditions for several weeks, where their skin yellows,  thins, and develops a waxy surface, and the juice vesicles enlarge.  The preserved lemons of northern Africa have recently become more widely  appreciated as a condiment. They’re made by cutting and salting lemons and  letting them ferment for some weeks. The growth of bacteria and yeasts softens  the rind and changes their aroma from bright and sharp to rich and rounded. Short  versions of the process — for example, freezing and thawing the lemons to speed  salt penetration, then salting for a few hours or days — will bring about some
chemical changes as the oil glands are disrupted and their contents mix with other  substances, but not the full flavor development of fermentation.  Food Words:   Orange, Lemon, Lime  The orange fruit got its modern name from its ancient Sanskrit name,  naranga,   and the fruit then lent its name to the vivid color that characterizes  it.   Lemon   and   lime   both come via Arabic from a Persian word, reflecting the  route by which these Asian fruits were brought to the West.  Other Citrus Fruits   Lesser-known citrus fruits that are worth knowing about  include the following:  •   Bergamot,   C. bergamia,   possibly a cross between the sour orange and sweet  lime ( C. limettoides ), is grown mainly in Italy for its floral-scented rind oil. It  was one of the components of the original eau de cologne developed in  17th-century Germany, and is mainly used in perfumes, tobaccos, and Earl  Grey tea.  •   Kumquats, species of the genus   Fortunella,   are bite-size fruits that are eaten  whole,   thin   rind   and   all. They   are   generally   tart   but   not   bitter. The  calamondin or calamansi, also a diminutive citrus, is probably derived in part  from the kumquat.  •   The finger lime,   Microcitrus australasica,   is a small, elongated citrus relative  native to Australia. Its fruit has robust, decorative round juice vesicles that  can be pale or pink-red, and a distinctive aroma.  •   The makrut or kaffir lime,   Citrus hystrix,   is common throughout Southeast  Asia. Its rough green peel has a lime-like aroma with general citrus and pine  notes (from limonene, pinene), and is used to flavor various prepared dishes,  as are its intensely lemon-scented leaves (p. 410).  •   The tangelo and tangor are modern hybrids between the tangerine and  grapefruit, and tangerine and orange, with hybrid flavors as well, and mostly  eaten as fresh fruit.  •   The yuzu,   Citrus junos,   possibly a mandarin hybrid, came from China but was  developed in Japan beginning around a thousand years ago. The rind of the
small yellow-orange fruit is used to flavor various dishes, and to make  vinegar, teas, and preserves. It has a complex flavor that includes musky  sulfur   compounds, and clove and oregano notes (from   the phenolics  eugenol and carvacrol).  Some Common Tropical Fruits  A century ago, only a handful of tropical fruits were available to Europe and North  America, and they were luxuries. Nowadays the banana is a common breakfast  food and new fruits appear in the market every year. Here are the most familiar.  Food Words: Tropical Fruits  Many of our words for tropical fruits come from the peoples among whom  Western travelers first encountered them.   Banana   comes from several West  African languages,   mango   from south Indian Tamil,   papaya   from Carib,   durian  from Malay (a word meaning “thorn”).  Banana and Plantain   Thanks to their productivity and starchy nutritiousness,  bananas and plantains top the roster of world fruit production and trade. The  worldwide annual per capita consumption is almost 30 lb/14 kg, and in regions  where they’re a staple food, individuals consume several hundred kilograms per  year. Bananas and plantains are the seedless berries of a tree-sized herb related to  the grasses,   Musa sapientum,   which originated in the tropics of Southeast Asia. A  banana plant produces a single flower structure with from 1 to 20 “hands” or fruit  clusters, as many as 300 “fingers” of individual fruit, each fruit weighing from a  couple of ounces to 2 lb/50–900 gm. The characteristic curve of long fruits  develops because the fruit tip grows upward, against the downward pull of gravity.  Bananas and plantains are climacteric fruits, store their energy as starch, and  convert some or most of that starch to sugar during ripening. In the dramatic case  of the banana, a starch-to-sugar ratio of 25 to 1 in the mature but unripe fruit  becomes 1 to 20 in the ripe fruit.  The terms   banana   and   plantain   are used for two broad and overlapping categories
for the many varieties of these fruits. Bananas are generally sweet dessert varieties,  and plantains are starchy cooking varieties. Bananas are very sweet when ripe,  their nearly 20% sugar content exceeded only by dates and jujubes, while ripe  plantains may be only 6% sugar and 25% starch. Both are picked green and  ripened in storage, and are very perishable once ripe thanks to their active  metabolism. Bananas develop a meltingly smooth consistency, and a distinctive  aroma due primarily to amyl acetate and other esters, and green, floral, and clove  (eugenol) notes. Banana acidity also increases during ripening, sometimes twofold,  so the flavor becomes more full in several dimensions. Ripe plantains generally  retain a dry, starchy texture and can be treated as potatoes are, fried or mashed or  cooked in chunks.  The pulp of these fruits is colored by carotenoids — plantain varieties often more  noticeably — and tannins often make the unripe pulp astringent. Bananas and  plantains   are   very   prone   to   brown-black   discoloration   thanks   to   browning  enzymes and phenolic substances in defensive latex-bearing vessels associated  with the vascular system. These substances slowly decline by about half during  ripening, so once a fruit is ripe, it can be refrigerated with relatively little  discoloration of the flesh (the peel will still turn black).  Though a small handful of banana varieties (Grand Nain, Gros Michel, Cavendish)  dominate in international trade, there are many interesting Latin American and  Asian varieties to be found in ethnic markets, usually shorter, with tinted skin and  flesh and intriguingly different flavors.  Cherimoya and Atemoya   The cherimoya and atemoya are tree fruits of species in  the genus   Annona,   a native of tropical and subtropical South America (the soursop  or guanabana and the custard apple belong to the same genus). They are medium-  sized masses of fused ovaries with their seeds, enclosed in inedible green or tan  skins. Like pears, they can contain gritty stone cells. Cherimoyas and atemoyas are  climacteric fruit that store starch and convert it to sugar during ripening; the result  is a soft, sweet, low-acid flesh with about double the calories of common  temperate fruits. They owe a vaguely banana-like note to esters, and flowery and  citrus notes to a number of terpenes. They must be kept warmer than 55ºF/13ºC  until they ripen, after which they can be refrigerated for a few days. Cherimoyas  and atemoyas are eaten with a spoon both chilled and frozen, and are pulped and  made into drinks and sorbets.
Durian   Durian is the large, thorn-covered fruit of a tree,   Durio zibethinus,   that’s a  native of Southeast Asia and cultivated mainly in Thailand, Vietnam, and Malaysia.  Durian is notorious for its very unfruit-like aroma, a powerful smell that can be  reminiscent of onions, cheese, and meat at various stages of decay! At the same  time many people prize it for its delicious flavor and creamy, custard-like texture.  The armored mass of fused ovaries, each containing a seed, can weigh more than  13 lb/6 kg, and apparently evolved to appeal to elephants, tigers, pigs, and other  large jungle creatures, which are drawn to it by its battery of powerful sulfur  compounds, including some found in onions, garlic, overripe cheese, skunk spray,  and rotten eggs. These compounds are mainly found in the outer rind, while the  fleshy segments surrounding the seeds are more conventionally fruity and savory,  with an especially high content of sugars and other dissolved solids (36%). Durian  is eaten as is, made into drinks, candies, and cakes, and incorporated into rice and  vegetable dishes. It’s also fermented to make it even stronger-tasting (Malaysian  tempoyak ).  Guava and Feijoa   Guavas are the large berries of a bush or small tree in the genus  Psidium,   a native of the tropical Americas, and a member of the myrtle family,  which includes the clove, cinnamon, nutmeg, and allspice trees. True to their family  background, they have a strong, spicy/musky aroma (from cinnamate esters and  some sulfur compounds). Their flesh contains hundreds of small seeds and many  gritty stone cells, so guavas are most often used to make purees, juices, syrups, and  preserves. The Spanish colonizers exploited their high pectin content to make a  New World version of quince paste. Guavas are remarkable for a vitamin C content  that can reach 1 gram per 100 grams, with much of it concentrated near and in the  thin, fragile peel.  The so-called pineapple guava, or feijoa, comes from the shrub   Feijoa sellowiana,  also a South American member of the myrtle family. It shares a similar size and  structure and some flavor elements with guava, but its strong aroma is distinctive  and less complex, dominated by a particular group of esters (from benzoic acid). It  too is usually pulped and strained for use in liquid preparations.  Breadfruit and Jackfruit   Breadfruit and jackfruit are fruits of two species of the  Asian genus   Artocarpus,   a relative of the mulberry and fig, and resemble each other  in structure. They’re very large assemblies of fused ovaries and their seeds;  breadfruits may reach 9 lb/4 kg, and jackfruits 10 times that weight. Jackfruit, a  native of India, has a conventional composition for a fruit — mostly water, with 8%
sugar and 4% starch — and develops a strong, complex aroma with musky, berry,  pineapple, and caramel notes. It’s eaten raw and in ice creams, as well as dried,  preserved, and pickled. Breadfruit, whose origins in the Pacific islands remain  unclear, gets its name from its very high starch content, as much as 65% by weight  (with 18% sugar and just 10% water) when mature but unripe, and when cooked  into a dry, absorbent mass. It’s a staple food in the South Pacific and in the  Caribbean, where it was taken by Captain Bligh of the notorious   Bounty   mutiny. It  may be boiled, roasted, fried, or fermented into a sour paste, then dried and  ground into flour. Ripe breadfruit is sweet and soft, even semiliquid, and made into  desserts.  Lychee   Lychees are subtropical Asian tree fruits (from   Litchi chinensis ) the size of a  small plum, with a dry, loose skin and a large seed. The edible portion is its fleshy  seed covering, or aril, which is pale white, sweet, and distinctively floral due to the  presence of a number of terpenes (rose oxide, linalool, geraniol; Gewürztraminer  grapes and wine share many of the same notes). Lychees with small, undeveloped  seeds are called “chicken-tongue” fruit and are prized because there’s more flesh  than seed. Lychees don’t improve in flavor once taken from the tree. A common  problem with lychees is a brown discoloration of the flesh due to drying out or  chilling injury. They’re best held at cool room temperatures in a loose plastic bag.  When cooked, fresh lychees sometimes develop a pink undertone as phenolic  aggregates are broken apart and converted into anthocyanin pigments (p. 281).  They’re eaten fresh, canned in syrup, made into drinks, sauces, and preserves,  cooked briefly and served with meats and seafood, and frozen into sorbets and ice  creams. “Lychee nuts” are the dried fruits, not the seeds.  Rambutans, longans, and pulasans are all arils of Asian fruits in the same family as  the lychee (the Sapindaceae), and have similar qualities.  Mango   Mangoes are the succulent, aromatic fruits of an Asian tree,   Mangifera  indica,   a distant relative of the pistachio and cashew trees, that has been cultivated  for many thousands of years. There are hundreds of varieties with very different  qualities, including flavor and degrees of fibrousness and astringency. The mango  skin contains an irritant and allergenic phenolic compound similar to that in the  cashew. Their   deep   orange   color   comes   from   carotenoid   pigments,   mainly  betacarotene. Mangoes are climacteric fruits that accumulate starch, so they can  be picked green and will sweeten and soften as they ripen, from the seed  outwards. Their flavor is especially complex, and may be dominated by the
compounds that characterize peaches and coconuts (lactones), generically fruity  esters, medicinal or even turpentiny terpenes, and caramel notes. Green mangoes  are very tart, and are made into pickles as well as dried and ground to make an  acidifying powder (Hindi   amchur ). Mango pickles were so admired in 18th-century  England that the fruit lent its name to the preparation and to other suitable  materials: hence “mango peppers.”  Mangosteen   The mangosteen is the medium-sized, leathery-skinned fruit of an  Asian tree, G   arcinia mangostana.   Its white flesh consists of the arils around several  seeds, and is moist and has a pleasing sweet-tart balance, with a delicate, fruity  and flowery aroma, something like a lychee. It’s usually eaten fresh or in preserves,  and is also canned.  Papaya   Papayas are species of the genus   Carica,   a native of the American tropics  that looks like a small tree but is actually a large herbaceous plant. The common  papaya,   C. papaya,   consists of a thickened ovary wall, orange to orange-red with  carotenoid pigments, and a few dark seeds in a large central cavity. It is a  climacteric fruit that doesn’t store any starch. Ripening begins at the center and  progresses outward, and causes a manyfold increase in carotenoid pigments and  aroma molecules, as well as a marked softening. Softening causes the apparent  sweetness to increase even though the actual sugar content doesn’t change (the  sugars are more readily released from the softened tissue). A ripe papaya is a low-  acid fruit with a delicate, flowery aroma thanks to terpenes, and a touch of  cabbage-like pungency due to the surprising presence of isothiocyanates (p. 321).  These compounds are especially concentrated in the seeds, which can be dried  and used as a mildly mustardy seasoning.  Unripe, crisp green papaya is made into salads and pickles. The green fruit contains  vessels of milky latex rich in the protein-digesting enzyme papain, which is found  in some meat tenderizers. Papain levels drop during ripening, but can still cause  texture and taste problems like those caused by the pineapple enzyme bromelain  (p. 384).  Two other papaya species can be found in markets. The large cool-climate  mountain papaya,   C. pubescens,   is less sweet than the lowland papaya, but richer in  papain and in carotenoid pigments, often including lycopene, which gives its flesh  a reddish tinge. The babaco,   C. pentagona,   is apparently a natural hybrid, and has  cream-colored, tart, seedless flesh.
Passion Fruit, Granadilla   Passion fruits and the granadilla come from about a  dozen species of vines of the genera   Passi-flora   and   Tacsonia,   natives of tropical  lowlands and subtropical highlands in South America. They consist of a brittle  ( Passi-flora ) or soft ( Tacsonia ) outer husk, with a mass of hard seeds embedded in  pulpy seed coverings, or arils. The arils are the only edible portion, and make up  barely a third of the fruit weight. Though the pulp is sparse, its flavor is  concentrated and actually benefits from dilution. Passion fruits are unusual for  their relatively high acid content, mainly citric — more than 2% of the pulp weight  in purple-skinned types, and double that in most yellow ones — and their strong,  penetrating aroma, which appears to be a complex mixture of fruity and flowery  notes (esters, peach-like lactones, violet-like ionone), and unusual musky notes  (from sulfur compounds like those in black currants and sauvignon blanc wines).  Passion fruit pulp is used mainly to make beverages, ices, and sauces, with the  milder purple   P. edulis   generally consumed fresh and the stronger yellow   P. edulis  var. flavicarpa   processed (an early commercial application was Hawaiian punch).  Meat-Eating Fruits: The Puzzle of Plant Proteases  At first glance, it seems strange that fruits should contain meat-and gelatin-  digesting enzymes, the molecules that prevent cooks from making jellies with  those raw fruits. Of course there are a few carnivorous plants that trap insects  and other small creatures in digestive juices. And in some plant parts, similar  enzymes probably provide protection against attack by insects and larger  animals, whose insides they can irritate or injure. But fruits are meant to be  eaten by animals so that the animals will disperse the plant’s seeds. So why fill  them with proteases?  In the cases of papaya, pineapple, melon, fig, and kiwi, the enzymes may limit  the number of fruits that any one animal eats: too many and the animal’s  digestive system suffers. Another intriguing suggestion is that in moderation,  the enzymes actually benefit seed-dispersing animals by ridding them of  intestinal parasites. Some tropical peoples use fig and papaya latex for this  purpose, and it’s known that the enzymes do indeed dissolve live tapeworms.
Flavor Elements in Some Common Fruits  The sugar and acid contents of fruits vary, and depend largely on ripeness.  The figures below generally represent commercial reality rather than the  ideal, and are meant to provide a rough way to compare the qualities of  different fruits. Generally, the sweeter a fruit is, the tastier it is; but even a  sweet fruit will seem one-dimensional without some counterbalancing  acidity. The aroma notes listed represent volatile chemicals that flavor  chemists have found in the fruit but that don’t smell simply like the fruit; they  have qualities of their own that contribute to the overall flavor. Blank entries  indicate a lack of information, not a lack of interesting aroma!  Fruit   Sugar  Content, %  by weight  Acid  Content, %  by weight  Sugar/  Acid  Ratio  Contributing  Aroma Notes  Pome  Apple   10   0.8   13   Many; depend on  variety (p. 356)  Pear   10   0.2   50  Stone  Apricot   8   1.7   5   Citrus, floral, almond  Cherry   12   0.5   24   Almond, clove, floral  Peach   10   0.4   25   Creamy, almond  Plum   10   0.6   17   Almond, spicy, floral  Citrus  Orange   10   1.2   8   Floral, musky  (sulfurous), spicy  Grapefruit   6   2   3   Musky, green,  meaty, metallic  Lemon   2   5   0.4   Floral, pine  Lime   1   7   0.1   Pine, spicy, floral
Fruit   Sugar  Content, %  by weight  Acid  Content, %  by weight  Sugar/  Acid  Ratio  Contributing  Aroma Notes  Berries  Blackberry   6   1.5   4   Spicy  Black currant   7   3   2   Spicy, musky  Blueberry   11   0.3   37   Spicy  Cranberry   4   3   1   Spicy, almond,  vanilla  Gooseberry   9   1.8   5   Spicy, musky  Grape   16   0.2   80   Many; depend on  variety (p. 363)  Raspberry   6   1.6   4   Floral (violet)  Red currant   4   1.8   2  Strawberry   6   1   6   Green, caramel,  pineapple; clove,  grape (wild)  Melon  Cantaloupe   8   0.2   40   Green, cucumber,  musky  Honey dew   10   0.2   50   Green, musky  Watermelon   9   0.2   45   Green, cucumber  Tropical  Banana   18   0.3   60   Green, floral, clove  Cherimoya   14   0.2   70   Banana, citrus, floral  Guava   7   1   7   Spicy, musky  Lychee   17   0.3   57   Floral  Mango   14   0.5   28   Coconut, peach,  caramel, turpentine
Fruit   Sugar  Content, %  by weight  Acid  Content, %  by weight  Sugar/  Acid  Ratio  Contributing  Aroma Notes  Papaya   8   0.1   80   Floral  Passion fruit   8   3   3   Floral, musky  Pineapple   12   2   6   Caramel, meaty,  clove, vanilla, basil,  sherry  Others  Avocado   1   0.2   5   Spicy, woody  Cactus pear   11   0.1   110   Melon  Date  (semidry)  60   Caramel  Fig   15   0.4   38   Floral, spicy  Kiwi   11   3   4   Green  Persimmon   14   0.2   70   Pumpkin  Pomegranate   12   1.2   10  Tomato   3   0.5   6   Green, musky,  caramel  Pineapple   Pineapples are the large, pinecone-like fruit of   Ananas comosus,   a  member of the bromeliad family (which includes bromeliad houseplants) and  native to tropical but arid South America. ( Ananas   comes from a Guarani Indian  word for the fruit;   pineapple   from the Spanish   piña   due to its resemblance to the  similarly composite pinecone.) The plant had already spread to the Caribbean
before Columbus saw it there in 1493, and modern breeding efforts began shortly  thereafter in French and Dutch glasshouses.  Pineapples consist of spirals of separate seedless fruitlets, between 100 and 200 of  which fuse together and become joined to a central core. During the fusing  process, bacteria and yeasts become incorporated in the interior and may later  cause hidden spoilage. The fruit doesn’t store starch, is not a climacteric fruit, and  will not sweeten or improve in flavor once picked, though it will soften. Fully ripe  pineapples don’t ship well, so exported pineapples are harvested early, with as  little as half the sugar content that they’re capable of developing, and a fraction of  the aroma. Brown or black regions in the interior are caused by chilling injury  during shipment or storage; translucent areas seem to be caused by growing  conditions that load the fruit cell walls with sugars. The quality of pineapples from  the subtropics is less reliable than that of fruit from near the equator, where  seasonal and climatic variation is minimal.  Pineapple Flavor   Pineapples are remarkable for the intensity of their flavor, the  experience of which the 19th-century English writer Charles Lamb described as  “almost too transcendent…a pleasure bordering on pain, from the fierceness and  insanity of her relish.” At their best they are both very sweet and quite tart (from  citric acid), and with a rich aroma provided by a complex mixture of fruity esters,  pungent sulfur compounds, essences of vanilla and clove (vanillin, eugenol), and  several oxygen-containing carbon rings with caramel and sherry overtones. A  given pineapple has many different flavor zones. The fruitlets near the base form  first and are therefore the oldest and sweetest, and the acidity of the flesh doubles  from the core to the surface. Thanks to their assertive flavor and firm, somewhat  fibrous flesh, pineapples can be cut into chunks and baked, grilled, or fried. They  have an affinity for the flavors of butter and caramel and work well in baked goods,  as well as various raw preparations (salsas, drinks, sorbets).  Pineapple Enzymes   Pineapples contain several active protein-digesting enzymes  that are used in meat tenderizers, but can cause problems in other prepared  dishes. (In medicine they have been exploited as a means of cleaning burns and  other wounds, and they help control inflammatory diseases in animals.) Bromelain,  the major enzyme, will break down gelatin, so pineapple for gelatin-based desserts  must be cooked first, to inactivate the enzyme. And if incorporated into a mixture  containing milk or cream, bromelain will break down the casein proteins and  produce bitter-tasting protein fragments. Again, precooking the pineapple will
prevent this.  Star Fruit   Star fruit or carambola come from the small Southeast Asian tree   Aver-  rhoa carambola,   a member of the wood sorrel ( Oxalis ) family. These medium-sized,  yellowish fruits are notable for their starlike cross section, a decorative touch in  salads and garnishes, for an aroma with notes of Concord grapes and quince, and  for the presence of oxalic acid, mainly in the five ridges. When unripe and  especially rich in oxalic acid, star fruit are sourly reminiscent of similarly endowed  sorrel (p. 411) and are used to clean and polish metal! Star fruit are colored by  carotenoid pigments, including beta-carotene. A relative, the bilimbi, is too tart to  eat fresh and in the tropics is made into preserves and drinks.  Object 7
Flavorings From Plants: Herbs and Spices,  Tea and Coffee  Herbs and spices are ingredients that we use to add flavor to foods and drinks.  Herbs are plant leaves, fresh or dried, and spices are bits of dry seed, bark, and root.  We consume them in tiny amounts, and they have practically no nutritional value.  Yet from earliest times, these aromatic bits have been among the most highly  prized and costly of all ingredients. In the ancient world they were more than mere  foods: they were thought to have medicinal and even transcendental properties.  Sacrificial fires wafted the fumes of aromatics upward to please the gods, and at  the same time offered earth-bound humans a whiff of heaven. Spices came from  the ends of the earth, from Arabia and legendary lands to the east. The growing  hunger for the aromas of paradise helped drive the European exploration of the  globe, the discovery of the Americas, and the biological and cultural exchange that  helped shape the modern world.  Few people today think of herbs and spices as emissaries from paradise or to  heaven. Yet they’re more popular than ever: because herbs and spices do indeed  bring other worlds to our table. They mark the foods of different cultures with  distinctive flavors, and provide us a taste of Morocco at one meal and Thailand the  next. They help us recapture the kind of sensory variety that our ancestors enjoyed  in   foods   before   agriculture   made   eating   both   more   reliable   and   more  monotonous.   And   because   smell   is   one   of   the   senses   through   which   we  experience our immediate surroundings, herbs and spices delight by lending our  foods hints reminiscent of the forest, the meadow, the flower garden, the seacoast.  They can conjure a familiar part of the natural world in a bite or sip.  This chapter surveys herbs, spices, and three other important flavorings derived  from plants. Tea and coffee are such prominent ingredients in their own right that  we don’t think of them as herb or spice, but that’s essentially what they are: tea is a  dried leaf and coffee a roasted seed, and we use them to flavor water (and infuse it  with a useful drug, caffeine). And wood smoke is a flavoring created when intense  heat breaks plant tissues down into some of the same aromatics found in true  spices.
A Brief History of Spices  The story of spices is a colorful one, and has been told many times. It turned  out that tropical Asia was especially rich in spice plants. To the peoples of the  Mediterranean and Europe, who depended on Arab traders for both the  spices and information about them, this meant that cinnamon and pepper  and ginger were rare treasures from fabled lands.  The Romans knew a number of Eastern spices but in cooking used mainly  pepper. A thousand years later, Arab cultural influence introduced other  spices to wealthy medieval tables throughout Europe, and demand for them  grew with the middle classes. Medieval sauces often call for a half-dozen  spices, usually beginning with cinnamon, ginger, and grains of paradise. The  Turkish control of supply routes and prices impelled Portugal and Spain to  search for a new sea route to Asia; Columbus reached the Americas, the home  of chillis and vanilla, in 1492, and Vasco da Gama reached India in 1498. The  Portuguese and then the Spanish controlled the Spice Islands and the trade in  nutmeg and cloves until around 1600, when the Dutch embarked on two  centuries of brutally efficient control.  As spices were planted in other tropical countries and became cheaper and  more commonly available, they slowly faded from their former prominence in  European dishes, persisting mainly in sweets. But at the end of the 20th  century, the consumption of herbs and spices rose sharply in the West. In the  United States it tripled between 1965 and 2000 (to about 4 grams per day per  person), thanks to a growing appreciation of Asian and Latin American foods,  and especially the spiciness of “hot” chillis.  The Nature of Flavor and Flavorings  Flavor is Part Taste, Mostly Smell  The function of herbs and spices is to add flavor to our foods. Flavor is a composite  quality, a combination of sensations from the taste buds in our mouth and the
odor receptors in the upper reaches of our nose. And these sensations are  chemical in nature: we taste tastes and smell odors when our receptors are  triggered by specific chemicals in foods. There are only a handful of different tastes  — sweet, sour, salty, bitter, and savory or umami (p. 342), while there are many  thousands of different odors. It’s odor molecules that make an apple “taste” like an  apple, not like a pear or radish. If our nose is blocked by a cold or pinching fingers,  it’s hard to tell the difference between an apple and a pear. So most of what we  experience as flavor is odor, or aroma. Herbs and spices heighten flavor by adding  their characteristic aroma molecules. (The exceptions to this rule are the pungent  spices and herbs, which stimulate and irritate nerves in the mouth; seep. 394.)  Odors and the Suggestiveness of Volatility   The aroma chemicals of herbs and  spices are   volatile : that is, they’re small and light enough to evaporate from their  source and fly through the air, which allows them to rise with our breath into the  nose, where we can detect them. High temperatures make volatile chemicals more  volatile, so heating herbs and spices liberates more of their aroma molecules and  fills the air with their odor. Unlike most of the objects that we sense around us,  which we see or touch or hear, aromas are an invisible, intangible presence. To  cultures that knew nothing of molecules and odor receptors, this ethereal,  penetrating quality suggested a realm of invisible beings and powers. So herbs  and spices became important in the sacrificial fires and incense of religious  ceremonies; they were offerings to the gods, a way of evoking their presence and  imagining their heaven. Perfumes — a word that comes from the Latin for  “through fire” — have long been the source of a similarly mysterious appeal.  The Aromas of Holiness and Paradise  In the religions of the ancient world, spices were a means by which spiritual  fulfillment could be symbolized and experienced as a form of sensuous  delight.  A garden inclosed is my sister, my spouse; a spring shut up, a fountain  sealed.  Thy plants are an orchard of pomegranates, with pleasant fruits;  camphire, with spikenard, Spikenard and saffron, calamus and
cinnamon, with all trees of frankincense; myrrh and aloes, with all the  chief spices: A fountain of gardens, a well of living waters, and streams  from Lebanon. Awake, O north wind; and come, thou south; blow upon  my garden, that the spices thereof may flow out.  — Song of Solomon, 4:12–15  Allah will deliver them from the evil of that day and make their faces  shine with joy. He will reward them for their steadfastness with robes of  silk and the delights of Paradise…. They shall be served with silver  dishes, and beakers as large as goblets; silver goblets which they  themselves shall measure: and cups brim-full with ginger-flavored  water from the Fount of Selsabil.  — The Koran, “Man,” 76: 11–15  The Evolving World of Taste and Smell  We humans are animals, and for all animals, the sense of smell does far more than  provide information about a mouthful of food. Smell detects whatever volatile  molecules are in the air. It therefore tells an animal about its surroundings: the air,  the ground, the plants growing in the ground, other animals moving nearby that  might be enemies, mates, or a meal. This more general role explains why we’re  sensitive to aroma notes in foods that are reminiscent of the world: wood, stone,  soil, air, animals, flowers, dry grass, the seacoast and the forest. It’s also essential for  animals to learn from experience, and therefore to associate particular sensations  with the situations they accompany. This may be why odors are so evocative of  memories and the emotions associated with them.  The Variety of Gathered Foods, the   Monotony of Agriculture   Our earliest  human ancestors were omnivores: they ate whatever they could find worth eating  on the African savanna, from meat scraps on an animal carcass to nuts, fruits,  leaves, and tubers. They relied on taste and smell to judge whether a new object  was edible — sweetness meant nourishing sugars, bitterness toxic alkaloids,  foulness dangerous decay — and to help identify and recall the effects of objects  they had encountered before. And they ate a varied diet that probably included
several hundred different kinds of foods. They had a lot of flavors to keep track of.  When humans developed agriculture around 10,000 years ago, they traded their  diverse but chancy diet for a more predictable and monotonous one. Now they  lived largely on wheat, barley, rice, and corn, all concentrated sources of energy  and protein, and all relatively bland. They had very few flavors to keep track of. But  they still had their senses of taste and smell.  Spices Haven’t Always Gone with Foods  In the time of classical Greece and Rome, when spices were much used in  religious ceremonies and in perfumes, not everyone thought that they also  belong in foods!  The question may be raised, why aromatics and other fragrant things,  while they give a pleasant taste to wine, do not have this effect on any  other article of food. In all cases, they spoil food, whether it be cooked  or not.  — Theophrastus,   De causis plantarum , 3rd century   BCE  Today we need “supplements” for meat. We mix oil, wine, honey, fish  paste, vinegar, with Syrian and Arabian spices, as though we were  really embalming a corpse for burial.  — Plutarch,   Moralia , 2nd century   CE  Flavorings Provide Stimulation and Play   One distinctly human characteristic is a  drive to explore and manipulate the world of natural materials around us, to  change those materials to suit our needs and interests. And these needs and  interests include the stimulation of our senses, the creation of sensory patterns  that engage our brains. After the development of agriculture and its radically  simplified diet, our ancestors found ways to give our taste buds and nose more to  experience again. One way was to make use of plant parts that are especially  concentrated sources of flavor. Herbs and spices made it possible not only to give  bland foods more flavor, but to give them more varied flavors, to ornament foods  and highlight flavor for flavor’s sake.
Flavorings are Chemical Weapons  And why are some plants’ parts especially potent, intense sources of flavor? What  role do the chemicals that give them their flavor play in the lives of the plants  themselves?  One simple clue is their very potency. Try the experiment of chewing on an  oregano leaf, or a clove, or a vanilla bean. The result is far from pleasurable! When  eaten as is, most spices and herbs are acrid, irritating, numbing. And the chemicals  responsible for these sensations are actually toxic. The purified essence of oregano  and of thyme can be bought from chemical supply companies, and come with  bright warning labels: these chemicals damage skin and lungs, so don’t touch or  inhale. This is precisely the primary function of these chemicals: to make the plants  that produce them obnoxious and therefore resistant to attack by animals or  microbes. The flavors of herbs and spices are defensive chemical weapons that are  released from plant cells when the plant is chewed on. Their volatility gives them  the advantage of counterattacking through the air, not just on direct contact, and  of being a warning signal that can train some animals to be deterred by smell  alone.  Turning Weapons Into Pleasures: Just Add Food  And yet humans have come to prize these weapons that are meant to repel us.  What makes herbs and spices not only nontoxic and edible but delicious is a  simple principle of cooking: dilution. If we bite into an intact leaf of oregano or a  peppercorn, the concentrated dose of defensive chemicals overwhelms and  irritates our senses; but those same chemicals diffused throughout a dish of other  foods — a few milligrams in a pound or two — stimulate without overwhelming.  They add favors that our grains and meats don’t have, and make those foods more  complex and appealing.  The Chemistry and Qualities Of Herbs and Spices  Most Flavorings Resemble Oils  The flavorful material in an herb or spice is traditionally called its essential oil. The  term reflects an important practical fact: aroma chemicals are more similar to oils
and fats than they are to water, and are therefore more soluble in oil than they are  in water (p. 797). This is why cooks make prepared flavor extracts by infusing herbs  and spices in oil, not water. They do infuse herbs in watery vinegar and in alcohols,  but both alcohol and vinegar’s acetic acid are small cousins of fat molecules, and  help dissolve more aromatics than plain water could. The defensive aroma  chemicals can have disruptive effects on a plant’s own cells as well as on predators,  so plants take care to isolate them from their inner workings. Herbs and spices  stockpile their aroma chemicals in specialized oil-storage cells, in glands on the  surfaces of leaves, or in channels that open up between cells. Some dry spices are  as much as 15% essential oil by weight, and many are 5–10%. Fresh and dry herbs  generally contain much less, around 1%, fresh herbs because their water content is  much higher, and dry herbs because they lose aroma chemicals in the drying  process.  The Flavor of an Herb or Spice is Several Flavors Combined  As we’ve seen many times and in many foods, flavor is a composite quality. A ripe  fruit may contain hundreds of different aromatic compounds; and the same goes  for a roast. Though we tend to think of a particular herb or spice as having its own  distinctive   flavor,   it   too   is   always   a   composite   of   several   different   aroma  compounds. Sometimes one of those compounds predominates and provides the  main character — as in cloves, cinnamon, anise, thyme — but often it’s the mixture  that creates the character, and that makes a spice well suited to serve as a unifying  bridge   among   several   different   ingredients.   Coriander seed, for   example,   is  simultaneously flowery and lemony; bay leaf combines eucalyptus, clove, pine, and  flowery notes. It can be fascinating — and useful — to taste spices analytically,  trying to perceive the separate components and how their flavors are built. Terms  from perfumery can be helpful: there are “top notes,” perceived right away, ethereal  and quick to fade; there are “mid-notes,” the main flavors; and there are “bottom  notes,” which are slow to develop and which persist. The charts on pp. 392 and 393  list the prominent aroma components in a selection of herbs and spices. There are  two particular chemical families that contribute many of the aroma compounds in  herbs and spices.
Flavor Families: The Terpenes  Terpene   compounds are constructed from a zigzag building block of five carbon  atoms, which turns out to be amazingly versatile and can be combined, twisted,  and decorated into tens of thousands of different molecules. Plants usually  produce a mixture of defensive terpenes. They are characteristic of the needles and  bark of coniferous trees, of citrus fruits (p. 374), and of flowers, and provide pine-  like, citrusy, floral, leaf-like, and “fresh” notes to the overall flavor of many herbs and  spices. As a family, terpenes tend to be especially volatile and reactive. This means  that they’re often the first molecules to reach the nose, and provide the initial  impression of these lighter, more ethereal notes. It also means that they’re readily  boiled off or modified by even brief cooking, which is why these fresh, light notes  disappear. If desired, they can be restored to a cooked dish by adding a new dose  of the herb or spice just before serving.  Examples of terpene aroma compounds. The black dots show the backbone of carbon  atoms. Limonene and menthol are distinctive, while myrcene provides a background  note in a number of spices and herbs.  Flavor Families: The Phenolics  Phenolic compounds are constructed from a simple closed ring of six carbon  atoms and at least one fragment of a water molecule (an oxygen-hydrogen  combination). Single rings can then be modified by adding other atoms to one or  more of the carbons, and two or more rings can be linked together to form  polyphenolic compounds, including anthocyanin pigments and lignin. Unlike the  terpene aromatics, which often have a generic quality to them, the phenolic  aromatics are distinctive and define the flavor of such spices as cloves, cinnamon,
anise,   and   vanilla,   as   well   as   the herbs   thyme   and   oregano. The   pungent  components of chillis, black pepper, and ginger are also synthesized from a  phenolic base.  Thanks to the water fragment on the carbon ring, phenolic compounds are  somewhat more soluble in water than most terpenes. They tend to be more  persistent in foods and in the mouth as we eat and taste.  Examples of phenolic aroma compounds.  Flavor Families: Important Terpenes and Phenolics and Their Aromas  Chemical Compound   Aroma  Terpenes  Pinenes   Pine needles and bark  Limonene, terpinene, citral   Citrus fruits  Geraniol   Roses  Linalool   Lily of the valley  Cineole   Eucalyptus  Menthol and menthone   Peppermint  L-carvone   Spearmint  D-carvone   Caraway  Phenolics  Eugenol   Clove
Chemical Compound   Aroma  Cinnamaldehyde   Cinnamon and cassia  Anethole   Anise  Vanillin   Vanilla  Thymol   Thyme  Carvacrol   Oregano  Estragole   Tarragon  Flavor Families: Pungent Chemicals  There is a major exception to the rule that herbs and spices provide aroma. The  two most popular spices in the world are chillis and black pepper. They and a  handful of other spices — ginger, mustard, horseradish, wasabi — are especially  valued for a quality often called hotness, but best called   pungency : neither a taste  nor a smell, but a general feeling of irritation that verges on pain. Pungency is  caused by two general groups of chemicals. One group, the thiocyanates, are  formed in mustard plants and their relatives, horseradish and wasabi, when the  plant cells are damaged. Most thiocyanates are small, light, water-repelling  molecules — a dozen or two atoms — that readily escape from the food into the  air in our mouth, and up our nasal passages. In both the mouth and nose they  stimulate nerve endings that then send a pain message to the brain. The second  group of pungent chemicals, the alkyl-amides, are found preformed in a number of  unrelated plants, including the chilli, black pepper, ginger, and Sichuan pepper.  These molecules are larger and heavier — 40 or 50 atoms — and therefore less  prone to escape the food and get up our nose; they mostly affect the mouth. And  their action turns out to be very specific. They bind to particular receptors on  certain   sensory   nerves   and   essentially   cause   those   nerves   to   become  hypersensitive to ordinary sensations — and thus to register the sensation of  irritation or pain. The mustard thiocyanates appear to act in a similar way in the  mouth and nose.
Examples of pungent flavor compounds.  Why Pain Can Be Pleasurable  Why should irritating spices be our favorites? Psychologist Paul Rozin has proposed  a couple of different explanations. Perhaps spicy foods are the edible equivalent of  riding a rollercoaster or jumping into Lake Michigan in January, an example of  “constrained risk” that sets off uncomfortable warning signals in the body. But  since the situations are not truly dangerous, we can ignore the normal meaning of  these sensations and savor the vertigo, shock, and pain for their own sakes. The  sensation of pain may also cause the brain to release natural pain-relieving body  chemicals that leave a pleasant glow when the burning fades.  Stimulation and Sensitizing   We may also enjoy spicy food because irritation adds  a new dimension to the experience of eating. Recent research has found that, at  least in the case of the pepper and chilli irritants, there’s a lot more to pungency  than a simple burn. These compounds induce a temporary inflammation in the  mouth, transforming it into an organ that is more “tender,” more sensitive to other  sensations. Those heightened sensations include touch, temperature, and the  irritating aspects of various other ingredients, including salt, acids, carbonation  (which becomes carbonic acid), and alcohol. It’s the pepper that makes Chinese  hot and sour soup, which is hot and acidic and salty, into such an intense  experience. A few mouthfuls and we become conscious of simply breathing: our  mouth becomes so sensitive that exhaling body-temperature air feels like a  textured hot bath, inhaling room-temperature air like a refreshingly cool breeze.
Strong pungency actually diminishes our sensitivity to true tastes — to sweetness,  tartness, saltiness, bitterness — and to aroma, in part because it usurps some of  the attention our brains would normally pay to these other sensations. Our  sensitivity to pungent flavorings also declines with exposure to it, and that  desensitization lasts for 2–4 days. This is part of the reason that regular chilli-eaters  can tolerate hotter dishes than people who enjoy pungent food only occasionally.  The Relative Strengths of Pungent Chemicals  in Black Pepper, Chillis, and Ginger  In this list, the pungency of piperine, the active ingredient in black pepper, is  arbitrarily set at 1. The ingredients in ginger and grains of paradise are similar  in strength, while the capsaicins in chillis are much stronger. The actual  pungency of a given spice depends both on the identity of the active  ingredient and its concentration in the spice.  Pungent Compound   Spice   Relative Pungency  Piperine   Black pepper   1  Gingerol   Ginger, fresh   0.8  Shogaol   Ginger, old (from gingerol)   1.5  Zingerone   Ginger, heated (from gingerol)   0.5  Paradol   Grains of paradise   1  Capsaicin   Chilli   150–300  Capsaicin variants   Chilli   85–90
The Flavor Components in Common Herbs  This chart and the chart opposite are a guide to experiencing flavorings from plants as the  flavor mixtures they truly are. The charts identify some of the important flavor notes in  individual herbs and spices, both by general sensory quality and by the names of the  chemicals that contribute them. This information can help us perceive more in the flavor of  a given herb or spice, and understand its affinities for other ingredients.  The lists of flavor qualities and chemicals are selective, and the groupings informal. The  “light” category comprises mainly terpene compounds, the “warm” and “penetrating”  categories mainly phenolic compounds. “Distinctive” compounds are those that are found  almost exclusively in one herb or spice and contribute much of its character.  LIGHT   WARM, SWEET   OTHER QUALITIES  Fresh   Pine   Citrus   Floral   Woody   Warm, "sweet"   Anise   Penetrating   Distinctive  Angelica   phellandrene   pipene   limonene   angelica lactone  Avocado leaf   estragole,  anetnole  Basil   cineole   linalool   methyl eugenol   estragole   cineole,  eugenol  Bay   cineole   pinene   linalool   methyl eugenol   cineole,  eugenol  Bay, Calif.   cineole, sabinene   pinene   sabinene   cineole  Borage   cucumber  aldehyde  Celery   phthalides  Chervil   estragole  Coriander   decenal  Curry leaf   phellandrene   pinene   terpineol   caryophyllene  Dill   phellandrene   pinene   limonene   myristicin   dill ether  Epazote   pinene   limonene   ascaridol  Fennel   myristicin   anethole  Hoja santa   safrole  Hyssop   pinocamphone   pipene   camphor  Juniper berry   pinene   sabinene   myrcene  LIGHT   WARM, SWEET   OTHER QUALITIES  Fresh   Pine   Citrus   Floral   Woody   Warm, "sweet"   Anise   Penetrating   Distinctive  Lavender   lavandulyl acetate, cineole   linalool   terpinenol   ocimene   cineole   linalyl acetate  Lemongrass   citral   geraniol, linalool  Lemon verbena   citral   linalool  Lovage   terpineol   carvacrol   phthalides  Makrut lime   citronellal  Marjoram   sabinene   terpinene   linalool   sabinene  Mint, pepper-   pinene   menthol  Mint, spear-   cineole   pinene   limonene   myrcene   cineole   L-carvone,  pyridines  Oregano   carvacrol   carvacrol  Parsley   phellandrene   myristicin   myrcene   menthatriene  Perilla   limonene   perillaldehyde  Rosemary   cineole   pinene   terpineol   borneol   myrcene   cineole,  camphor  Sage   cineole   pinene   cineole,  camphor  thujone  Sassafras   phellandrene   pinene   limonene   linalool   myrcene
Savory   carvacrol,  thymol  Screwpine   pyrroline  Tarragon   phellandrene   pinene   limonene   myrcene   estragole  Thyme   pinene   cymene   linalool   thymol   thymol  Wintergreen   methyl salicylate  Fresh   Pine   Citrus   Floral   Woody   Warm, "sweet"   Anise   Penetrating   Distinctive  LIGHT   WARM, SWEET   OTHER QUALITIES  The Flavor Components in Common Spices  LIGHT   WARM, SWEET   OTHER QUALITIES  Fresh   Pine   Citrus   Floral   Woody   Warm, " sweet"   Anise   Penetrating   Pungent   Distinctive  Ajwain   pine  ne  terpine  ne  thymol   thymol  Allspice   cineole   caryophyllene   cineole, eugenol  Anise   anethole   anethole  Annatto   pine  ne  limone  ne  humulene   myrcene  Asafoetida   di-, tri-,  tetrasulfides  Caraway   limone  ne  D-carvone  Cardamom   sabinene,  cineole  pine  ne  limone  ne  terpineol,  linalool  sabinene   terpenyl acetate   cineole  Cardamom,  large  cineole   cineole, camphor  Cassia   cinnamyl acetate   methoxy-cinnamate   cinnam-  aldehyde  Celery seed   limone  ne  phthalide,  sedanolide  Chilli   capsaicin  Cinnamon   cineole   linalool   caryophyllene   cinnamyl  acetate  cineole, eugenol   cinnam-  aldehyde  Clove   caryophyllene   eugenyl acetate   eugenol   eugenol  Coriander   pine  ne  citral   linalool   camphor  Cumin   phellandrene   pine  ne  cuminaldehyde  Dill seed   phellandrene   pine  ne  limone  ne  D-carvone  Fresh   Pine   Citrus   Floral   Woody   Warm, " sweet"   Anise   Penetrating   Pungent   Distinctive  LIGHT   WARM, SWEET   OTHER QUALITIES
LIGHT   WARM, SWEET   OTHER QUALITIES  Fresh   Pine   Citrus   Floral   Woody   Warm, " sweet"   Anise   Penetrating   Pungent   Distinctive  Fennel seed   pine  ne  limone  ne  anethole   fenchone   anethole  Fenugreek   sotolon   sotolon  Galangal   cineole   pine  ne  geranyl  acetate  methyl cinnamate   cineole, camphor,  eugenol  galangal acetate  Ginger   phellandrene,  cineole  citral   linalool   zingiberene   cineole   gingerol,  shogaol  Grains of  paradise  linalool   humulene,  caryophyllene  gingerol,  shogaol  Horseradish   thiocyanates  Licorice   paeonol   ambrettolide  Mace   sabinene   pine  ne  myristicin   methyl eugenol  Mastic   pine  ne  myrcene  Mustard   thiocyanates  Nigella   pine  ne  carvacrol  Nutmeg   sabinene,  cineole  pine  ne  limone  ne  geraniol   myristicin   myrcene, methyl  eugenol  cineole   safrole  Pepper, black   sabinene   pine  ne  limone  ne  caryophyllene   piperine  Pepper,  cubeb  sabinene   terpineol   cineole  Pepper, long   caryophyllene   piperine  Pepper, pink   phellandrene   pine  ne  limone  ne  carene   cardanol  Pepper,  Sichuan  phellandrene   pine  ne  citrone  llol  geraniol,  linalool  sanshool  Saffron   safranal  Sansho   citrone  llal  geraniol,  linalool  sanshool  Star anise   limone  ne  linalool   estragole,  anethole  anethole  Sumac   pine  ne  limone  ne  Turmeric   phellandrene,  cineole  turmerone,  curcumene  cineole  Vanilla   linalool   vanillin   eugenol, cresol,  guaiacol  vanillin  Wasabi   thiocyanates  Fresh   Pine   Citrus   Floral   Woody   Warm, " sweet"   Anise   Penetrating   Pungent   Distinctive  LIGHT   WARM, SWEET   OTHER QUALITIES
Herbs, Spices, and Health  Herbs and Spices as General Medicinals   The idea that herbs and spices have  medicinal value is an ancient one, and grounded in fact: plants are virtuosos of  biochemical invention, and have been the original source of many important  drugs (aspirin, digitalis, quinine, taxol are just a few). The health effects of plant  foods in general are discussed above, p. 253. Herbs and spices, with their  specialization in phenolic and terpene compounds, are notable for three broadly  helpful tendencies. Phenolic compounds often have antioxidant activity; oregano,  bay leaf, dill, rosemary, and turmeric are among the most effective. Antioxidants  are useful both in the body, to prevent damage to DNA, cholesterol particles, and  other important materials, but also in foods, to slow the deterioration in their  flavor. Terpenes don’t prevent oxidation, but they do help reduce the body’s  production of DNA-damaging molecules that can cause cancer, and help control  the   growth   of   tumors.   And   some   phenolic   compounds   and   terpenes   are  antiinflammatory agents; they moderate the body’s overreaction to cell damage,  which can otherwise contribute to the development of both heart disease and  cancer.  We don’t yet know whether the consumption of herbs and spices can significantly  reduce the risk of any disease; but it’s a real possibility.  Herbs, Spices, and Food Poisoning   It has been suggested that people first began  to use herbs and spices, particularly in tropical countries, because their defensive  chemicals help control the microbes that cause food poisoning, and thus made  food safer to eat. While some — garlic, cinnamon, cloves, oregano, thyme — are  fairly effective at killing important disease microbes, most are not. And many,  especially black pepper and others that take several days to dry in tropical  climates, carry millions of microbes in every pinch, sometimes including   E. coli   and  disease-causing species of   Salmonella, Bacillus,   and   Aspergillus.   This is why spices  are often fumigated with various chemicals (ethylene or propylene oxide in the  United States) or steamed. About 10% of imported spices are irradiated to  eradicate microbes.
Handling and Storing Herbs and Spices  Preserving Aroma Compounds  The aim in handling herbs and spices is to retain their characteristic aroma  compounds. The volatility of these compounds means that they readily evaporate,  and their reactive nature means that they are likely to be altered if they’re exposed  to oxygen and moisture in the air, or to reaction-causing heat or light. To preserve  herbs and spices, their tissues must be killed and dried out, so that they don’t rot,  but as gently as possible, so that water is removed without removing all the flavor.  Then the dried material must be kept in closed containers, in a dark, cool place. As  a general rule, herbs and spices keep best in opaque glass containers in the freezer  (the container should be warmed to room temperature before opening to prevent  moisture in the air from condensing onto cold flavorings). In practice, most cooks  keep their flavorings at room temperature. As long as they aren’t regularly exposed  to strong light, whole spices keep well for a year, and ground spices for a few  months. The fine particles of ground spices have a large surface area and lose their  aroma molecules to the air more rapidly, while whole spices retain the aromas  within intact cells.  Storing Fresh Herbs  Many herbs are young, delicate stems and leaves, and so more fragile than other  produce. Because their stems have been cut, they’re likely to be producing the  wound hormone ethylene, which in a closed container will accumulate and trigger  general deterioration. Most are best stored in the refrigerator in partly open plastic  bags, loosely wrapped in cloth or paper that will absorb moisture and prevent  microbes from growing rapidly on wet leaves. Because they come from warm  climates, basil and perilla suffer chilling injury in the refrigerator and so are best  kept at room temperature, with freshly cut stems immersed in water.  The flavor of many herbs is well preserved by freezing, though the tissues suffer  damage from ice crystals and become unattractively dark and limp when thawed.  Immersion in oil, which protects the tissue from oxygen, also works for a few  weeks, after which much of the flavor has oozed into the oil. Herbs in oil should  always be kept in the refrigerator, because the same absence of oxygen that’s
good for flavor preservation is also good for the growth of botulism bacteria. The  bacteria don’t grow or produce toxins at refrigerator temperatures.  Drying Fresh Herbs  Drying is a process that removes most of the water in an herb, which when fresh  may be more than 90% water. The basic dilemma is that many aroma chemicals are  more volatile than water, so any process that evaporates most of the water will also  evaporate most of the flavor. This is why many dried herbs don’t taste anything like  the fresh version, and instead have a generic dried-leaf, hay aroma. There are a few  exceptions to this rule, mainly Mediterranean herbs in the mint family that are  native to hot, arid areas and have aromatics that persist in drying conditions  (oregano, thyme, rosemary, as well as bay laurel from the laurel family). Though  sundrying sounds appealing, its high temperatures and strong dose of visible and  ultraviolet light mean that it generally removes and alters flavor. Air-drying over  the course of a few days in the shade is much preferable. Herbs can be dried in just  a few hours in a low oven or a dehydrator, but the higher temperature usually  causes greater flavor losses than air-drying. Some commercial herbs are freeze-  dried, which often preserves more of the original flavor.  The microwave oven turns out to work fairly well for drying small quantities of  herbs, thanks to the selective and rapid effects of its radiation. Microwave energy  excites   water   molecules   while   leaving   non-polar   oil   molecules   relatively  unaffected, and it penetrates instantly throughout thin leaves and stems (p. 786).  This means that all the water molecules in a batch of herbs reach the boiling point  within a few seconds and begin to escape from the leaves, while the structures  containing the oil-like flavor compounds (glands and canals, pp. 402 and 407) heat  up more gradually and indirectly, via the heat of the water molecules. The herbs  dry in a matter of a few minutes, with less drastic flavor losses than result from  ordinary oven drying.  Cooking With Herbs and Spices  Herbs and spices are generally cooked along with other ingredients, and as a  relatively minor component of the mixture, 1% or less of the total weight. This  section explores the extraction and transformation of flavor in such dishes. But  some preparations rely on flavorings to provide more than just flavor (p. 401). And
a number of herbs — parsley, sage, basil — are delicious on their own, deep-fried  just long enough to become crisp and mellow their flavor.  Flavor Extraction  For herbs and spices to provide us with flavor, cooks must find ways to liberate the  flavor chemicals from within their tissue and convey them to our taste and odor  receptors. For fragile herbs, this may be as simple as strewing the fresh leaves on  the dish, as in Vietnamese soups: the eater liberates the aromas by chewing on the  leaves, and enjoys them at their freshest. But if the flavors are to be incorporated  into the dish, then the flavor compounds must somehow escape from the herb or  spice. The cook may leave the flavoring intact and use liquids and heat to  encourage the flavors to seep out gradually, or he may break it into particles —  chopping fresh herbs, crumbling dry ones, grinding spices — to expose the flavor  molecules directly to the dish. The finer the crumble or grind, the greater the  surface area from which flavor molecules can escape, and so the more rapidly the  flavor moves from flavoring into dish.  Rapid extraction may or may not be desirable. In a briefly cooked dish, it’s  essential. In a long-cooked stew, however, a slower release from coarser particles  or whole leaves and seeds may be preferable. In pickles and preserves, whole  spices provide flavor without clouding the liquid. Once flavor molecules have been  extracted into a preparation, they begin to react with oxygen and with other food  molecules, and their original flavor is transformed, however subtly. Larger particles  release the original flavors over a longer time. Another way to assure some fresh  flavors in a long-cooked dish is to add the herb or spice — either altogether or a  supplemental dose — toward the end of cooking, or even after the cooking is  done.  Prepared flavor extracts such as vanilla extract are handy because the flavor  molecules have already been dissolved in a liquid and immediately permeate the  dish. Because cooking will only cause their flavor to evolve or to evaporate,  extracts are best added toward the end of a preparation.  Grinding, Crushing, Chopping   There are several ways of crushing herbs and  spices, and they have different effects on flavor. Grinders, choppers, and mortars all  generate heat. The hotter the aroma molecules get, the more volatile they become  and the more readily they escape, and the more reactive and changeable they
become. The original flavors are best preserved by prechilling both spice and  grinder to keep the aromatics as cool as possible. Food processors slice into herbs  and introduce a lot of air and therefore aroma-altering oxygen, while a pestle  pounding in a mortar crushes herbs and minimizes aeration. Careful chopping  with a sharp knife leaves much of the herb structure intact to provide fresh flavor  while minimizing cell damage to the cut edges; by contrast, a dull knife crushes  rather than cuts, bruises a wide swath of cells, and can result in rapid brown-black  discoloration.  One positive effect of oxygen on finely ground spices is manifested in the aging of  ground blended spices, which are said to mellow over the course of several days or  weeks.  The Influence of Other Ingredients   Because aroma chemicals are generally more  soluble in oils, fats, and alcohol than in water, the ingredients in the dish will also  influence the speed and degree of flavor extraction, as well as the release of flavor  during eating. Oils and fats dissolve more aroma molecules than water during  cooking, but also hang on to them during eating, so that their flavor appears more  gradually and persists longer. Alcohol also extracts aromas more efficiently, but  because it too is volatile, it releases them relatively quickly.  Two methods of flavor extraction that take advantage of the volatility of aroma  molecules are steaming and smoking. Herbs and spices can be immersed in the  steaming water, or can form a bed on which the food sits above the steam; either  way, heat drives aroma molecules into the steam, which then condenses onto the  cooler surface of the food, and flavors it. If placed on smoldering coals, or onto a  heated pan, herbs and spices will emit not only their usual aromatics, but  aromatics transformed by the high heat.  Marinades and Rubs  In the case of large solid chunks of meat or fish, it’s easy to get herb and spice  flavors onto the food surface, but not so easy to get them inside. Water-and oil-  based marinades coat the meat with flavorful liquid, while pastes and dry rubs put  the solid aromatics in more direct contact with the meat surface. Because flavors  are mainly fat-soluble molecules, and meat is 75% water, flavor molecules can’t  move very far inside. A distinctly salty marinade or rub can help somewhat by  disrupting the meat tissue (p. 155) and making it easier for some slightly water-
soluble aromas to penetrate it. A more efficient method is to use a cooking syringe,  and inject small portions of the flavorful liquid into many different parts of the  meat interior.  Some Classic Mixtures of Herbs and Spices  France  Bouquet garni   Bay, thyme, parsley  Fines herbes   Tarragon, chervil, chive  Quatre épices   Black pepper, nutmeg, clove, cinnamon  Herbes de  Provence  Thyme, marjoram, fennel, basil, rosemary, lavender  Morocco  Chermoula   Onion, garlic, coriander leaf, chilli, cumin, black pepper, saffron  Ras el hanout   20+, including cardamom, cassia, mace, clove, cumin, chilli,  rose petals  Middle East  Za’atar   Marjoram, oregano, thyme, sesame, sumac  Zhug   Cumin, cardamom, garlic, chilli  India  Garam masala   Cumin, coriander, cardamom, black pepper, clove, mace,  cinnamon  Panch phoran   cumin, fennel, nigella, fenugreek, mustard  China  Five-spice   Star anise, Sichuan pepper, cassia, clove, fennel  Japan  Shichimi   Sansho, mustard, poppyseed, sesame seed, mustard, dried  mandarin peel  Mexico  Recado rojo   Annatto, Mexican oregano, cumin, clove, cinnamon, black  pepper, allspice, garlic, salt
Herbs and Spices as Coatings  A useful side effect of coating meat and fish with a paste or rub of herbs and spices  is that such a coating acts as a protective layer — like the skin on poultry — that  insulates the meat itself from the direct high heat of oven or grill. This means that  the outer layers of meat end up less overcooked, and so moister. Coarsely cracked  spices, coriander in particular, can provide a crunchy counterpoint to the softer  insides. The flavor of a spice crust is improved if the coating contains some oil,  which essentially causes the crust to fry rather than simply dry out.  Extracts: Flavored Oils, Vinegars, Alcohols  A special case of flavor extraction is the making of flavor extracts themselves:  preparations that serve as instant sources of flavor for other dishes. The most  common materials used for extraction are oils, vinegars, sugar syrups (especially  for flowers), and alcohols (for example, a neutral vodka for flavoring with citrus  peel). The herb and/or spice is usually bruised to damage the cellular structure and  make it easier for the liquid to penetrate and aromas to escape. Oils, vinegars, and  syrups are often heated before the herb or spice is added to kill bacteria and  facilitate their initial penetration into the tissue, then are allowed to cool to avoid  changing the flavor. Delicate flowers may require less than an hour to flavor a  syrup, while leaves and seeds are usually infused in the extracting liquids for weeks  at a cool room temperature. When the extract has reached its desired strength, the  liquid is strained off and then stored in a cool, dark place.  Because alcohol, acetic acid, and concentrated sugar all kill bacteria or inhibit their  growth, flavored alcohols, vinegars, and syrups pose few safety problems. Oils,  however, actually encourage the growth of deadly   Clostridium botulinum,   whose  spores can survive brief boiling and germinate when protected from the air. Most  herbs and spices don’t provide enough nutrients for botulism bacteria to grow on,  but garlic does. Infused oils are safest when they’re made and stored at refrigerator  temperatures, which do slow extraction, but also prevent bacterial growth and  slow deterioration.  Commercial Extracts   Commercial flavor extracts, unlike kitchen-made extracts,  are highly concentrated and are added to foods in tiny quantities, a few drops or a  fraction of a spoonful in a whole dish. Vanilla, almond, mint, and anise are common  examples. Some extracts and oils are prepared from actual herbs and spices, while
others are prepared from one or a few synthetic chemicals that capture the  essence of the flavoring, but don’t match it in complexity and mellowness (artificial  extracts often taste harsh and off). The advantage of synthetic extracts is their low  price.  Flavor Evolution  Once the aroma molecules in herbs and spices are released into a preparation and  exposed to other ingredients, the air, and heat, they begin to undergo a host of  chemical reactions. Some fraction of the original aroma chemicals becomes altered  into a variety of other chemicals, so the initially strong, characteristic notes  become more subdued, and the general complexity of the mixture increases. This  maturing can be a simple side effect of cooking the flavorings with the other  ingredients, but it often constitutes a separate preparation step. When cumin or  coriander are toasted on their own, for example, their sugars and amino acids  undergo browning reactions and generate savory aroma molecules typical of  roasted and toasted foods (pyrazines), thus developing a new layer of flavor that  complements the original raw aroma.  Maturing Spice Flavors: The Indian   System   The use of spices is especially ancient  and sophisticated in India and Southeast Asia. Indian cooks have several different  ways of maturing spice flavors before their incorporation into a dish.  •   The toasting on a hot pan of whole dry spices, typically mustard, cumin, or  fenugreek, for a minute or two until the seeds begin to pop, the point at  which their inner moisture has vaporized and they are just beginning to  brown. Spices cooked in this way are mellowed, but individually; they retain  their own identities.  •   The frying in oil or ghee of mixed powdered spices, often including turmeric,  cumin, and coriander. This step allows the different aroma chemicals to react  with each other so that the flavors become more integrated, and is usually  followed by the sequential addition of garlic, ginger, onions, and other fresh  components of what will become the sauce-like phase of the dish.  •   The slow frying of a paste of powdered and fresh spices, with constant  stirring until much of the moisture evaporates, the oil separates from the  paste, and the spice mixture begins to darken. Mexican cooks treat their  pureed chilli mixtures in much the same way. This technique yields its own
unique flavors, since dried and fresh ingredients (including active enzymes  from the latter) can interact from the beginning, and moisture from the fresh  spices prevents the dried spices from being as affected by the heat as they  are when fried on their own.  •   The brief frying in ghee of whole spices, which are then sprinkled on top of a  just-cooked dish as a final garnish.  Indian cooks also aromatize some dishes with a remarkable combination of  smoking and spicing called   dhungar.   They put the dish into a pot along with a  hollowed onion or small bowl that contains a live coal, sprinkle the coal with ghee  and sometimes spices, and cover the pot tightly to infuse the dish with the fumes.  In sum, herbs and spices are remarkably diverse ingredients in themselves, and are  capable of producing a remarkable diversity of effects. Combinations, proportions,  particle sizes, the temperature and duration of cooking, all have an influence on  the flavor of a dish.  Herbs and Spices as Thickeners  Some herbs and spices are used to provide the substance of a dish as well as its  aromatic essence. A puree of fresh herbs, as in the Italian pesto sauce made from  basil, is thick because the herb’s own moisture is already bound up with various  cell materials. And thanks to the abundance of those cell materials — mainly cell  walls and membranes — such purees also do a good job of coating oil droplets  and so creating a stable, luxurious emulsion (p. 628). Fresh chillis, which are fruits,  produce a watery puree, but one that cooks down to a wonderful smoothness  thanks to its abundant cell-wall pectins. Many Mexican sauces are made from a  backbone of dried chillis, which are easily rehydrated to produce the same smooth  puree; and Hungarian paprikashes are thickened with powdered chillis.  Indian and Southeast Asian dishes often owe their thickness to a combination of  dried and fresh spices. Ground coriander absorbs a lot of water thanks to its thick  dry husk; ginger, turmeric, and galangal are starchy root-like rhizomes, and their  starch dissolves during prolonged simmering to provide a thickening tangle of  long molecular chains. Ground dried sassafras leaves, or filé powder, similarly  thickens Louisianan gumbo. And fenugreek is remarkable for its high content of a  mucilaginous carbohydrate called galactomannan, which is released simply by  soaking the ground seeds.
A Survey of Common Herbs  Most of the herbs used in traditional European cooking are members of two plant  groups, the mint family and the carrot family. The family members resemble each  other to varying degrees, so in this survey I’ve grouped them together. The  remaining herbs then follow in mostly alphabetical order.  Fresh herbs are usually harvested from mature plants, often as they’re beginning  to flower, when their defensive essential oil content is at its peak. The oil content of  Mediterranean herbs is higher on the side of the plant facing the sun. An  interesting variation is to harvest them as young sprouts with just a few leaves,  when their essential oil content can be very different. Fennel sprouts, for example,  contain relatively little anise-like anethole, which dominates the flavor of the  mature plant.  The Mint Family  The mint family is a large one, with around 180 genera, and it provides more of our  familiar kitchen herbs than any other family. Why such generosity? A fortunate  combination of several factors. Members of the mint family dominate the dry,  rocky Mediterranean scrublands where few other plants grow, and they cope with  their exposed situation with a vigorous chemical defense. Their chemical defenses  are located mainly in small glands that project from their leaves, external and  therefore expandable storage tanks that can make up as much as 10% of the leaf’s  weight. And members of the mint family are both promiscuous chemists and  promiscuous   breeders:   individual   species   make   a   broad   range   of   aromatic  chemicals, and they readily hybridize with each other. The result is a great variety  of plants and aromas.  Basil   Basils are a large and fascinating group of herbs. They’re members of the  tropical   genus   Ocimum,   which   probably   originated   in   Africa,   and   was  domesticated in India. There are around 165 species in the genus   Ocimum,   several  of which are eaten. Basil was known to the Greeks and Romans, took firmest root in  Liguria and Provence, inventors of the popular basil purees called pesto and  pistou, and was hardly known in the United States until the 1970s. The standard  “sweet basil” of Europe and North America,   Ocimum basilicum,   is among the more  virtuosic of the herbs, and has been developed into several different flavor
varieties, including lemon, lime, cinnamon, anise, and camphor. Most varieties of  sweet basil are dominated by flowery and tarragon notes, though the variety used  in Genoa to make the classic sauce   pesto genovese   is apparently dominated by  mildly spicy methyleugenol and clove-like eugenol, with no tarragon aroma at all.  Thai   basil   ( O.   basilicum   and   tenuiflorum )   tends   toward   the   anise-like   and  camphoraceous; Indian holy basil ( O. tenuiflorum ) is dominated by eugenol.  The flavor of basil depends not only on the variety, but on growing conditions and  the stage at which it is harvested. Generally, aroma compounds make up a larger  proportion of young sweet basil leaves than old, by as much as five times. In leaves  that are still growing, the relative proportions of the different compounds actually  vary along the length of the leaf, with the older tip richer in tarragon and clove  notes, the younger base in eucalyptus and floral notes.  Mint family anatomy. A leaf of oregano, showing the microscopic oil glands that cover  the surfaces of herbs in the mint family. The fragile, exposed glands filled with  pungent essential oil offer a first line of defense against predators.  Bergamot   This herb, also known as bee balm and Oswego tea, comes from a  North American member of the mint family,   Monarda didyma,   whose aroma is  somewhat lemony. The same name is given to a member of the citrus family whose  essential oil is rich in flowery linalyl acetate, and which is the distinctive addition to  Earl Grey tea. (Confusingly, European watermint [p. 404] is also sometimes called  bergamot.)  Horehound   Horehound, so called for its hairy white (hoary) leaves, is a Eurasian
species,   Marrubium vulgare,   with a musky and bitter flavor, more often used in  candies than in cooking.  Hyssop   Hyssop is an ambiguous name. It is sometimes applied to a kind of plant  mentioned in the Bible and much used in the Middle East, a cluster of species  characterized by the penetrating quality of true oregano (see below). Hyssop  proper,   Hyssopus officinalis,   is a milder-mannered European herb with fresh-spicy  and camphor notes. It was enjoyed in ancient Rome but is now more commonly  used in Thai and Vietnamese cooking. Hyssop contributes to the flavors of several  alcohols, including Pernod, Ricard, and Chartreuse.  Lavender   Lavender is a Mediterranean plant long and widely valued for its  tenacious floral-woody perfume (from a mix of flowery linalyl acetate and linalool,  plus eucalyptus-like cineole), but more familiar in soaps and candles than in foods;  its name comes from the Latin for “wash.” Still, the dried blossoms of   Lavandula  dentata   are a traditional ingredient in the mixture   herbes de provence   (along with  basil, rosemary, marjoram, thyme, and fennel). They and the blossoms of English  lavender,   L. angustifolia,   are also useful alone when used discreetly as a garnish or  to infuse their qualities in sauces and sweets. Spanish lavender ( L. stoechas ) has a  complex scent reminiscent of Indian chutneys.  Lemon Balm   Lemon or bee balm is an Old World species,   Melissa officinalis,  distinguished by its mixture of citrusy and floral terpenes (citronellal and -ol, citral,  geraniol). Lemon balm is usually paired with fruit dishes and other sweets.  Marjoram   Marjoram was once classified as coming from a sister genus of oregano,  but now is officially a species of oregano itself,   Origanum majorana.   Whatever the  precise family relationship, marjoram differs from the oreganos in having a milder  flavor, fresh and green and floral, with little of their penetrating quality. It therefore  works well as one component in many herb blends and dishes.  Mints   The true mints are mainly small natives of damp habitats in Europe and Asia.  There are about 25 species in the genus   Mentha   and some 600 varieties, though  the family tendency to hybridizing and chemical variation confuses the picture.  The mints of most interest to the cook are spearmint ( Mentha spicata ) and  peppermint ( M. piperata ), which is an ancient hybrid between spearmint and  watermint ( M. aquatica ).  Both of the major culinary mints have a refreshing quality, but they are quite  different. Spearmint has a distinctive aroma thanks to a particular terpene, L-
carvone, and a richness and complexity thanks to pyridines, nitrogen-containing  compounds more typical of roasted foods than raw ones. Spearmint is widely used  in the Eastern Mediterranean as well as in India and Southeast Asia, in large  quantities, both fresh and cooked, and in both sweet and savory contexts. Simpler,  clearer-tasting peppermint contains little or no carvone or pyridines; instead it  makes a terpene called   menthol,   which gives it a uniquely cooling quality. In  addition to having its own aroma, menthol actually binds to receptors on  temperature-sensing nerve cells in the mouth, and causes those cells to signal the  brain that they are cooler than they really are by 7–13ºF/4–7ºC. Menthol is a  reactive chemical that rapidly degenerates when heated, so peppermint is usually  not cooked. Its concentration increases with the age of the leaf, so older leaves  taste   more   cooling;   hot   and dry growing   conditions   cause   menthol   to   be  transformed   into   a   noncooling,   somewhat   harsh   by-product   (pulegone,   the  characteristic volatile in pennyroyal).  Herbs of the Mint Family  Basil   Ocimum basilicum  Bergamot   Monarda didyma  Horehound   Marrubium vulgare  Hyssop   Hyssopus officinalis  Lavender   Lavendula dentata, L. angustifolia  Lemon balm   Melissa officinalis  Marjoram   Origanum majorana  Mints   Mentha   species  Oregano   Origanum   species  Perilla   Perilla frutescens  Rosemary   Rosmarinus officinalis  Sage   Salvia officinalis  Savory   Satureja   species  Thyme   Thymus vulgaris
A handful of other mints are worth knowing about. Watermint, one of the parents  of peppermint and sometimes called bergamot or orange mint, has a strong  aroma and used to be much cultivated in Europe, but now is more popular in  Southeast Asia. Pennyroyal ( M. pulegium ) is an especially pungent, peppery minor  mint, apple or pineapple mint (M.   suaveolens ) a sweet, apple-like one, and   Mentha  x piperata   “citrata” the perfumy lemon or eau de cologne mint.   Nepitella   is the  Italian name for   Calamintha nepeta,   a sometimes minty, sometimes pungent herb  native to the southern Mediterranean, used in Tuscany to flavor pork, mushroom,  and artichoke dishes. “Korean mint” comes from an anise-flavored Asian member  of the mint family,   Agastache rugosa.  Oregano   There are about 40 species in the Mediterranean genus   Origanum,   most  of them low, shrubby inhabitants of rocky places. The name comes from the Greek  for “joy (or ornament) of the mountains,” though we have no evidence about how  the Greeks enjoyed it. Oregano was little known in the United States until the rise  of the pizza after World War II. Oregano species easily form hybrids with each other,  so it’s not easy to sort out identities. The important thing for the cook is that they  come in a range of flavors, from mild to strong and penetrating. The penetrating  quality   comes   from   the   phenolic   compound   carvacrol.   Greek   oreganos   are  typically rich in carvacrol, while milder Italian, Turkish, and Spanish oreganos  contain more thyme-like thymol and fresh, green, floral, and woody terpenes.  Mexican oregano is an entirely different plant, various species of the Mexican  genus   Lippia,   a member of the verbena family. Some varieties do have a high  carvacrol content, some more resemble thyme, and some are more woody and  piney. They all have a substantially higher essential oil content than true oregano  (3–4% in the dry leaf, vs. 1%), and therefore seem stronger.  Despite its name, Cuban oregano is an Asian member of the mint family,  Plectranthus amboinicus,   with fuzzy succulent leaves and a good dose of carvacrol.  It’s now widely cultivated throughout the tropics; in India the fresh leaves are  battered and fried.  Perilla or Shiso   Perilla is the leaf of   Perilla frutescens,   a mint relative native to China  and India. It was taken to Japan in the 8th or 9th century and named shiso; many  Westerners get their first taste of it in sushi restaurants. The distinctive aroma of  perilla is due to a terpene called perillaldehyde, which has a fatty, herbaceous,  spicy character. There are several different perilla varieties, some green, some red
to purple with anthocyanins, some with no perillaldehyde and instead tasting of  dill or lemon. The Japanese eat the leaves and flower heads with seafood and  grilled meats, and use a red variety to color and flavor the popular pickled plum,  umeboshi. Koreans obtain both flavor and cooking oil from perilla seeds.  Rosemary   Rosemary is a distinctive woody shrub,   Rosmarinus officinalis,   that  grows in the dry Mediterranean scrublands, with leaves so narrow and tightly  rolled that they look like pine needles. It has a strong, composite scent, made up of  woody, pine, floral, eucalyptus, and clove notes. In southern France and Italy it  traditionally flavors grilled meats, but it can also complement sweet dishes.  Rosemary aroma is unusually well preserved by drying.  Sage   The genus   Salvia   is the largest in the mint family, with around a thousand  species that are rich in unusual chemicals, and have been used in many different  folk medicines. The genus name comes from a Latin root meaning “health.” Sage  extracts have been found to be excellent antimicrobial and antioxidant materials.  However, common garden sage,   S. officinalis,   is rich in two terpene derivatives,  thujone and camphor, that are toxic to the nervous system, so its use as anything  but an occasional flavoring is not a good idea.  Common or Dalmatian sage has a penetrating, warm quality from thujone, the  note of camphor, and a eucalyptus note from cineole. Greek sage ( S. fruticosa ) has  more cineole, while clary sage ( S. sclarea ) is very different, with a tea-like quality  and floral and sweet notes from a number of other terpenes (linalool, geraniol,  terpineol). Spanish sage,   S. lavandulaefolia,   is fresher-smelling and less distinctive,  with pine, eucalyptus, citrus, and other notes partly replacing thujone. Pineapple  sage,   S. elegans (rutilans ), comes from Mexico and is said to have a sweet, fruity  aroma.  Sage is especially prominent in northern Italian cooking, and in the U.S. flavors  poultry stuffings and seasonings and pork sausages; it seems to have an affinity for  fat. Most dried sage used to be “Dalmatian” sage, from the Balkan coast; today  Albania and other Mediterranean countries are the largest producers. “Rubbed”  sage is minimally ground and coarsely sieved leaves; it loses its aroma more slowly  than finely ground sage.  Savory   Savory comes in two types, which are two species of the northern-  hemisphere genus   Satureja.   Both summer savory ( S. hortensis ) and winter savory  ( S. montana ) taste like a mixture of oregano and thyme; they contain both
carvacrol and thymol. Summer savory is often the milder of the two. It’s thought  that savory may well be the parent genus of the various oreganos and marjoram. A  native of western North America,   S. douglasii,   is known as yerba buena in  California, and has a mild, mint-like flavor.  Thyme   Thyme got its name from the Greeks, who used it as an aromatic in their  burnt sacrifices; it shares its root with the words for “spirit” and “smoke.” There are a  lot of thymes: 60–70 species in the shrubby, tiny-leaved, mainly Mediterranean  genus   Thymus,   and as many or more varieties of the common thyme,   Thymus  vulgaris.   There are also many flavors of thyme, including lemon, mint, pineapple,  caraway, and nutmeg. A number of thyme species and varieties taste much like  oregano because they contain carvacrol. Distinctive thyme species and varieties  are rich in the phenolic compound called thymol. Thymol is a kinder, gentler  version of carvacrol, penetrating and spicy, but not as aggressively so. It’s this  moderate quality that probably endeared thymol thyme to the French, and that  makes it a more versatile flavoring than oregano and savory; European cooks have  long used it in meat and vegetable dishes of all kinds. Despite its gentler aroma,  thymol is as powerful a chemical as carvacrol, which is why thyme oil has long  been used as an antimicrobial agent in mouthwashes and skin creams.  The Carrot Family  Though the carrot family gave fewer flavoring plants to Europe than the mint  family, it is remarkable for including several that provide aromatic interest as both  herb and spice, and some even as vegetables. Members of the carrot family grow  in less extreme conditions than the Mediterranean mints, are generally tender  biennials rather than shrubby or woody perennials, and have flavors that are  generally milder, sometimes even sweet. The seeds (actually small dry fruits) may  have chemical defenses — and therefore are spices — because they’re fairly large  and tempting to insects and birds. One terpene, myristicin, shared by dill, parsley,  fennel, and carrots, and giving them a common woody, warm note, is thought to  be a defense against molds. The aromatic compounds are stored in oil canals  within the leaves, under large and small veins, and are generally found in smaller  quantities than the externally stored defenses of the mint family.
Herbs of the Carrot Family  Angelica   Angelica archangelica  Celery   Apium graveolens  Chervil   Anthriscus cerefolium  Coriander leaf   Coriandrum sativum  Dill   Anethum graveolens  Fennel   Foeniculum vulgare  Lovage   Levisticum officinale  Mitsuba   Cryptotaenia japonica  Parsley   Petroselinum crispum  Saw-leaf herb   Eryngium foetidum  Carrot family anatomy. A leaf of parsley. Herbs in the carrot family have defensive oil  glands within their leaves, not on the surfaces. The glands cluster around long canals  and fill them with the essential oil.  Angelica   Angelica   is   a   large,   rangy   plant   of   northern   Europe,   Angelica  archangelica,   that has fresh, pine, and citrus notes, but is dominated by a sweet-  smelling compound called the angelica lactone. Its candied stems were a popular  delicacy from medieval times through the 19th century, but they’re seldom seen in
the kitchen nowadays. Various parts of the plant now flavor gins, ver-mouths,  liqueurs, candies, perfumes, and other manufactured products.  Celery   Celery was a thin-stalked, aromatic but bitter herb called smallage before  gardeners developed the mild, thick-stalked vegetable.   Apium graveolens   is a  native of damp European habitats near the sea. The distinctive flavor of its leaves  and stalks comes from compounds called phthalides, which it shares with lovage  and with walnuts. It also has citrus and fresh notes. Celery is often simmered or  sautéed with onions and carrots to provide a broad aromatic base for sauces and  braises.  Chervil   Chervil ( Anthriscus cerefolium ) has small, pale, finely divided leaves, and a  delicate flavor that comes from relatively small amounts of the tarragon aromatic  estragole; it’s best used raw or barely warmed, since heat drives away its flavor.  Chervil is a component of the French mixture   fines herbes.  Coriander   Coriander or cilantro is said to be the most world’s most widely  consumed fresh herb.   Coriandrum sativum   is a native of the Middle East. Its seed  has been found in Bronze Age settlements and in the tomb of King Tut; it was  taken early to China, India, and Southeast Asia, and later to Latin America, and its  rounded, notched, tender leaves are popular in all these regions. In Central and  South America they came to replace culantro (p. 408), an indigenous relative with  very similar flavor, but with large, tough leaves. Coriander herb is not very popular  in the Mediterranean and Europe, where its aroma is sometimes described as  “soapy.” The main component of the aroma is a fatty aldehyde, decenal, which also  provides the “waxy” note in orange peel. Decenal is very reactive, so coriander leaf  quickly loses its aroma when heated. It’s therefore used most often as a garnish or  in uncooked preparations. In Thailand, the root of the herb is an ingredient in some  pounded spice pastes; the root contains no decenal and instead contributes  woody and green notes, something like parsley.  Dill   Dill ( Anethum graveolens ) is a native of southwest Asia and India with tough  stalks but very delicate, feather-like leaves. Dill was known in ancient Egypt, and  became popular in northern Europe, perhaps thanks to its affinity with the local  native caraway. Dillweed blends the distinctive flavor of its seed with pleasant  green, fresh notes and a unique, characteristic note of its own (dill ether), and in  Western cooking is most often used with fish. It is prepared in large amounts,  almost as a vegetable and often with rice, in Greece and in Asia. India has its own
distinctive variety,   A. graveolens   var.   sowa,   which is used as a vegetable as well as  for its seeds.  Fennel   Fennel is a native of the Mediterranean and southwest Asia; like dill, it has  fibrous leaf stalks but feathery, tender leaves. There is one species of fennel,  Foeniculum vulgare,   and it comes in three different forms. The wild subspecies,  piperitum,   is sometimes collected from the countryside in southern Italy and Sicily,  where it’s known as carosella and valued for its sharpness in meat and fish cooking.  (Fennel now grows wild throughout central California as well.) The cultivated  subspecies   vulgare   is known as sweet fennel thanks to its far richer content of the  phenolic compound anethole, which is 13 times sweeter than table sugar, and also  gives the characteristic sweet aroma of anise. And a specialized variety of sweet  fennel, var.   azoricum,   develops the enlarged leaf-stalk bases of bulb or Florence  fennel, which is used as an aromatic vegetable.  Lovage   Lovage ( Levisticum officinale ) is a large western Asian plant that has  aromat-ics in common with celery and oregano, along with a sweet, flowery note.  It was used in ancient Greece and Rome and known as Ligurian celery. Today its  large lobed leaves flavor beef dishes in central Europe, and tomato sauces in  Liguria. Elsewhere it’s little known.  Mitsuba   Mitsuba, sometimes called Japanese parsley, is a native of both Asia and  North America,   Cryptotaenia japonica   (or   canadensis ), whose mild, large leaves are  used by the Japanese in soups and salads. They’re flavored mainly by a mixture of  minor, woody-resinous terpenes (germacrene, selinene, farnesene, elemene).  Parsley   Parsley is a native of southeast Europe and west Asia; its name comes from  the Greek and means “rock celery.”   Petroselinum crispum   is one of the most  important herbs in European cooking, perhaps because its distinctive flavor (from  menthatriene) is accompanied by fresh, green, woody notes that are somewhat  generic and therefore complement many foods. When parsley is chopped, its  distinctive note fades, the green notes become dominant, and a faintly fruity note  develops. There are both curly-and flat-leaf varieties with different characteristics;  the flat leaves have a strong parsley flavor when young and later develop a woody  note, while curly leaves start out mild and woody and develop the parsley  character when more mature. The curly leaves are smaller and more incised and  therefore crisp faster when fried.  Saw-Leaf Herb   Saw-leaf herb or culantro is the New World’s version of coriander
leaf (cilantro), still used in the Caribbean but now most commonly found in Asian  cooking. There are more than a hundred species of   Eryngium,   some of them in  Europe, but   E. foetidum   comes from subtropical South America, and is easier to  grow in hot climates. Culantro has almost the same flavor as fresh coriander leaf,  the   main   aromatic   component   being   a   slightly   longer   fatty   aldehyde   than  coriander’s (dodecanal). Its leaves are large and elongated, with a serrated edge,  and   thicker   and   tougher   than   coriander   leaves. They’re   frequently   used   in  Vietnamese dishes, often torn and strewn on just before eating.  The Laurel Family  The ancient laurel family, mostly large tropical trees, is most notable for giving us  cinnamon; but it does give us one well-known herb and three less familiar but  interesting ones. The leaves of various cinnamon species are also used as herbs in  Asia, but are seldom seen in the West.  Avocado Leaf   Mexican races of the avocado tree ( Persea americana ) have leaves  with a distinct tarragon aroma, thanks to the same volatiles that flavor tarragon  and anise (estragole, anethole). More tropical avocado races (p. 337) lack this  aroma. In Mexico, avocado leaves are dried, then crumbled or ground to flavor  chicken, fish, and bean dishes.  Bay Laurel  Bay leaves, one of the most useful European herbs, come from an evergreen tree or  shrub native to the hot Mediterranean,   Laurus nobilis.   The medium-sized, tough,  dry leaf accumulates oils in spherical glands in the leaf interior, and has a well-  rounded mixture of woody, floral, eucalyptus, and clove notes. The leaves are  generally dried in the shade. Laurel branches were made into fragrant crowns in  the ancient world; today the leaves are a standard ingredient in many savory  dishes.  California Bay   California bay leaves come from an entirely different tree, the  California native   Umbellularia californica.   Their aroma bears some resemblance to  bay laurel, though it is distinctly stronger, with a dominant eucalyptus note (from  cineole).  Sassafras or Filé   Sassafras leaves come from a North American tree,   Sassafras  albidum.   The Choctaw Indians introduced them to French settlers in Louisiana, and
they are still most commonly encountered as the dry filé powder used to thicken  and flavor Louisiana gumbos. They carry woody, floral, and green notes, and  contain little or no safrole, a compound that’s prominent in the tree’s roots and  bark, and that used to give root beer its characteristic flavor until it was found to  be a likely carcinogen (see hoja santa below).  Other Common Herbs  Borage   Borage is a medium-sized Mediterranean native,   Borago officinalis,   with  bright blue flowers and large, fuzzy leaves that have the distinct flavor of  cucumber, thanks to enzymes that convert its fatty acids into the same nine-  carbon chain (nonanal) produced by cucumber enzymes. It was once a common  ingredient of mixed salads (see the recipe on p. 251). Plants in the borage family  accumulate potentially toxic alkaloids, so borage should be eaten in moderation.  Capers   Capers are the unopened flower buds of a Mediterranean bush,   Capparis  spinosa,   which have been gathered from the wild and pickled for thousands of  years, though cultivated only for a couple of centuries. The caper bush is distantly  related to the cabbage family and has its pungent sulfur compounds, which  dominate in the raw flower bud. The bud is preserved in various ways — in brine,  in vinegar, dry-salted — and used as a sour-salty accent in sauces and dishes,  especially with fish. When drysalted, the caper bud undergoes an astonishing  transformation: its radish and onion notes are displaced by the distinct aroma  (from ionone and raspberry ketone) of violets and raspberries!  Curry Leaf   Curry leaf is the leaf of a small tree in the citrus family,   Murraya koenigii,  a native of south Asia. It is primarily used in south India and Malaysia, where  households often have their own plant and add it to many dishes. Despite its  name, the curry leaf doesn’t taste like Indian curries; it is mild and subtle, with  woody, fresh notes. Curry leaves are added to stews or other simmered dishes, or  briefly sautéed to flavor a cooking oil. They are also remarkable for containing  unusual alkaloids (carbazoles) with antioxidant and antiin-flammatory properties.  Curry Plant   Curry plant is a Mediterranean member of the lettuce family,  Helichrysum italicum,   that has been said to be reminiscent of Indian curries. It does  contain a number of terpenes that give it a vaguely spicy, pleasant aroma; it’s used  to flavor egg dishes, teas, and sweets.  Epazote   Epazote is a scented member of the large “goosefoot” family, which also
provides us with spinach, beets, and the grain quinoa.   Chenopodium ambrosioides  is a weedy native of temperate central America that has spread throughout much  of the world, and lends a characteristic aroma to Mexican beans, soups, and stews.  That aroma is variously described as fatty, herbaceous, and penetrating, and is due  to a terpene called ascaridole. Ascaridole is also responsible for the use of epazote  in folk medicine; it is toxic to intestinal worms.  Hoja Santa   This herb’s name is Spanish for “holy leaf,” and refers to the large leaf of  New World relatives of black pepper,   Piper auritum   and   P. sanctum.   It’s used from  southern Mexico to northern South America to wrap foods and flavor them while  they’re cooked, and is also added directly to dishes as a flavoring. The main  aromatic in hoja santa is safrole, the characteristic note of sassafras familiar from  root beers, and a suspected carcinogen.  Houttuynia   Houttuynia is a small perennial Asian plant,   Houttuynia cordata,   in the  primitive lizard’s-tail family (Saururaceae), a relative of black pepper. Its leaves are  used in Vietnamese and Thai salads, stews, and other dishes. There are two main  varieties, one with a citrus aroma, and the other with an unusual scent said to  resemble a mixture of meat, fish, and coriander.  Juniper Berries   Juniper berries are not leaves, but their essence is the aroma of  pine needles, so I include them here, along with the observation that pine and  other evergreen needles are often used as flavorings. The Chinese steam fish over  pine needles, and the original flavoring for salt-cured salmon (gravlax) was  probably pine needles rather than dill. Pineyness is also one element in the aromas  of many herbs and spices (see charts, pp. 392, 393).  There are about 10 species of   Juniperus,   a distant relative of the pine, all native to  the northern hemisphere. They make small cone-like reproductive structures,  about a third of an inch or 10 mm across, but the scales remain fleshy and coalesce  to form a “berry” that surrounds the seeds. The berries take from one to three years  to mature, during which they turn from green to purplish black. When immature,  their aroma is dominated by the terpene pinene; when mature, they carry a mix of  pine, green-fresh, and citrus notes. After two years in a spice bottle there is very  little aroma left: so juniper berries are best when foraged and fresh. They are much  used in northern Europe and Scandinavia to flavor meats, especially game, and  cabbage dishes. Juniper is the distinguishing flavor in gin, and gave gin its name  (originally Dutch   genever ).
Lemongrass   Lemongrass is one of a small group of aromatic species in the grass  family.   Cymbopogon citratus   accumulates the lemony terpene citral (a mixture of  two compounds, neral and geranial), as well as flowery geraniol and linalool, in  special oil cells in the middle of its leaves. It is a native of seasonally dry southern  Asia, including the foothills of the Himalayas, and is important in the cooking of  Southeast Asia. Lemongrass forms clumps of thick shoots; all parts are aromatic,  but only the lower stalk is tender enough to be edible itself. The older outer leaves  can be used to infuse a dish with their flavor, or be made into an herbal tea. In  Thailand the tender stalk is a standard component of pounded spice pastes, and  it’s also eaten fresh in salads.  Lemon Verbena   Lemon verbena is a South American plant,   Aloysia triphylla,   a  relative of Mexican oregano. The lemony flavor of its leaves comes from the same  terpenes, collectively called citral, that flavor lemongrass; other terpenes lend a  flowery note.  Lolot   Lolot is the large, heart-shaped leaf of a black-pepper relative,   Piper lolot,   a  native of Southeast Asia, and used there as a flavoring wrap for grilling meats.  Orange Flowers   Orange flowers come from the bitter or Seville orange,   Citrus  aurantium,   and they have been used for millennia to flavor sweets and other  dishes in the Middle East, usually in the extract called orange-flower water. The  distinctive perfume results from a mixture of terpenes also found in roses and  lavender, with an important contribution from the same compound that flavors  concord grapes (methyl anthranilate).  Makrut or Kaffir Lime   Ma krut   is the Thai name for the tree also known as kaffir  lime (“kaffir” is Arabic for “unbeliever” and has derogatory connotations). This  Southeast Asian member of the citrus family,   Citrus hystrix,   has distinctively  aromatic leaves and fruit rinds that are an important ingredient in Thai and Laotian  cooking, especially soups, stews, and fish dishes. The rind has an unremarkable mix  of citrus, pine, and fresh notes, but the tough leaves are richly endowed with  citronellal, which gives them an intense, fresh, lingering lemon-green character  distinct from that of sweeter citral-flavored lemongrass (with which it’s often  cooked). Citronellal is named for citronella, its original and main source, which is a  sister species to lemongrass ( Cymbopogon winterianus ).  Nasturtium   The   flowers,   leaves,   and   immature   fruits   of   the   familiar   South  American native   Tropaeolum major   all have a pungency like that of watercress, and
enliven salads.  Nightshade   Nightshade is a relative of the potato,   Solanum torvum,   which grows  into a small and short-lived tree. It’s a native of the West Indies, but is now found  throughout tropical Asia. Its small berry-like fruits are intensely bitter, and are used  in Thailand, Malaysia, and Indonesia to contribute just that quality to sauces and  salads.  Rau Ram   Rau ram is the Vietnamese name for a sprawling herb in the buckwheat  family known in English as fragrant knotweed, and now as Vietnamese cilantro.  Polygonum odoratum   is a native of Southeast Asia whose leaves mix the aromas of  coriander and lemon with a slightly peppery taste. It’s often paired with mint, and  eaten fresh with many foods.  Rice-Paddy Herb   Rice-paddy herb is an aquatic plant in the snapdragon family,  Limnophila chinensis   ssp.   aromatica,   a native of Asia and the Pacific islands, whose  small leaves are used in Southeast Asian fish dishes, soups, and curries, especially  in Vietnam. It has a lemony but complex aroma produced by small quantities of a  citrusy terpene and the main ingredient of perilla (perillaldehyde).  Rose Flowers   Roses, mainly from the Eurasian hybrid   Rosa x damascena , have  been used for millennia from the Middle East through Asia, usually dried or in the  form of an extract (rose water). Their aroma comes mainly from the terpene  geraniol. Roses are most often used in sweets, but are also found in the savory  Moroccan spice mixture ras el hanout, and in North African sausages.  Screwpine or Pandan   Screwpine is the aromatic, strap-like leaf of shrubs related  to the lily family that are native to Indonesia (species of   Pandanus ). Screwpine  leaves are used in India and southeast Asia to flavor rice dishes and sweets, and to  wrap meats and fish. Their primary volatile compound is the same one that gives  basmati and jasmine rices their distinctive nutty aroma (2-acetyl-1-pyrroline, which  is also prominent in the aroma of popcorn and of crabmeat). The screwpine flower  is also aromatic and the source of a more perfume-like extract called kewra, which  flavors many Indian milk sweets.  Sorrel   Sorrel is the startlingly sour leaf of several European relatives of rhubarb  and buckwheat that are rich in oxalic acid:   Rumex acetosa, scutatus,   and   acetosella.  Cooks use them mainly as a source of acidity, and they also provide a more generic  green aroma. Sorrel readily disintegrates with a little cooking into a sauce-like  puree that complements fish, but whose chlorophyll turns drab olive from the
acidity. The color can be brightened by pureeing some raw sorrel and adding that  to the sauce just before serving.  Tarragon   Tarragon is the small, narrow leaf of a native of western and northern  Asia,   Artemisia dracunculus,   a member of the lettuce family. The robust wild  tarragon, often sold in plant nurseries as Russian tarragon, has a harsh and  uninteresting flavor, while the relatively fragile cultivated form, “French” tarragon,  has a distinctive aroma thanks to the presence of a phenolic compound called  estragole (from the French name for the plant,   estragon ) in oil cavities alongside  the leaf veins. Estragole is a close chemical relative of the anise aromatic anethole,  and does have an anise-like character. Tarragon is a component of the French mix  fines herbes,   is the primary flavoring in béarnaise sauce, and is often used to flavor  vinegars.  “Mexican tarragon” is a marigold-like New World native,   Tagetes lucida,   whose  leaves do indeed contain a mixture of anise-like anethole and tarragon’s estragole.  Tobacco   Tobacco is used occasionally as a food flavoring, and its curing resembles  the making of tea (p. 437). The leaves of the notorious North American native  Nicotiana tabacum,   a relative of the potato and tomato, are harvested when they  begin to turn yellow and develop resinous secretions, then either sun-cured or  fermented in heaps for several weeks, and dried by contact with hot metal. These  treatments develop a complex aroma with woody, leathery, earthy, and spicy  notes, and these are sometimes augmented with the addition of various essential  oils (vanilla, cinnamon, clove, rose, and others). Tobacco leaves contain astringent  tannins and bitter nicotine, so they are usually infused only lightly into sauces,  syrups, and creams. Sometimes whole leaves are used as a disposable wrapper to  flavor a food during cooking.  Water Pepper   Water pepper is a relative of rau ram, or Vietnamese coriander.  Polygonum hydropiper   is a widespread native of wet areas in the Northern  Hemisphere. Its leaves have been used as a pepper substitute in Europe, and are  now used mainly in Japan to provide a peppery, somewhat numbing pungency  (from polygodial). Water pepper also has woody, pine, and eucalyptus notes.  Wintergreen   Wintergreen is the leaf of   Gaultheria procumbens   or   fragrantissima,   a  North American bush in the blueberry and cranberry family, whose distinctive,  refreshing aroma is created mainly by methyl salicylate.
A Survey of Temperate-Climate Spices  As is true of herbs, many of our temperate-climate spices come from just a few  plant families. In the following survey, I group together spices that are botanically  related, and list the rest in alphabetical order. Tropical spices are surveyed  separately in the next section.  The Carrot Family  In addition to many leafy herbs, the carrot family also gives us a number of our  favorite spices. The aromatic “seeds” of plants in the carrot family are actually small  but complete fruits that are dry rather than fleshy. They are borne in pairs,  enclosed in a protective husk, and are usually sold husked and separated. The  individual fruits have a characteristic ridged surface, and their aromatic oil is  contained in canals that lie under the ridges.  Spices of the Carrot Family  Ajwain   Trachyspermum ammi  Anise   Pimpinella anisum  Asafoetida   Ferula asafoetida  Caraway   Carum carvi  Celery seed   Apium graveolens  Coriander   Coriandrum sativum  Cumin   Cuminum cyminum  Cumin, black   Cuminum nigrum  Dill seed   Anethum graveolens  Fennel seed   Foeniculum vulgare  Ajwain   Ajwain ( Trachyspermum ammi ) is a close relative of caraway, used in North  Africa and Asia, especially India, and can be thought of as a seed version of thyme:
it carries the essence of thyme, thymol, in a caraway-like seed.  Anise   Anise is the seed of a small central Asian plant,   Pimpinella anisum,   which has  been prized since ancient time. It’s remarkable for its high content of the phenolic  compound anethole, which is both distinctively aromatic and sweet-tasting, and  has been mainly used to flavor sweets and alcohols (Pernod, pastis, ouzo), though  the Greeks also use it in meat dishes and tomato sauces.  The Flavor of Anise  The volatile chemical that creates the typical aroma of anise — as well as of  fennel, star anise, the Central American pepper relative   Piper marginatum,   and  the herb sweet cicely ( Myrrhis odorata ) — is called trans anethole. It is one of a  group of compounds that are not only distinctively aromatic, but also  intensely sweet — 13 times sweeter than table sugar, weight for weight. Star  anise is chewed in China, and fennel seed in India, to “sweeten the breath,”  and they are also literally sweet for the person chewing. A related sweet  aromatic is estragole (methyl chavicol), which is most prominent in sweet  basil and tarragon.  Anethole is unusual among phenolic flavor compounds for remaining  pleasant to the taste at high concentrations. Its very high concentration in  anise-flavored liquors is the reason for the dramatic clouding that results  when these liquors are diluted with water: anethole dissolves in alcohol but  not in water, so when the added water dilutes the alcohol, the anethole  molecules cluster together in bunches big enough to scatter light.  Asafoetida   Asafoetida is one of the strangest and strongest of all spices. It comes  from a perennial plant in the carrot family native to the mountains of Central Asia,  from Turkey through Iran and Afghanistan to Kashmir; India and Iran are major  producers.   Ferula asafoetida, F. alliacea, F. foetida,   and   F. narthex   look something like  giant carrot plants, growing to 5 feet/1.5 m and developing massive carrot-like  roots 6 in/15 cm in diameter, from which new sprouts arise every spring. The spice  is obtained after the new foliage begins to turn yellow. The top of the root is  exposed, the foliage pulled out, and the root surface periodically scraped to
wound it and gather the protective sap that collects in the wound. The sap slowly  hardens and develops a strong, sulfurous aroma reminiscent of human sweat and  washed-rind cheese (p. 58). Sometimes the resin is aged in fresh goat or sheep skin  to augment its aroma, which is so strong that the resin is commonly ground and  diluted for sale with gum arabic and flour. The aroma of asafoetida is due to a  complex mixture of sulfur compounds, a dozen identical with volatiles in the onion  family, and a number of less common di-, tri-, and tetrasulfides. Asafoetida can give  the impression of onions, garlic, eggs, meat, and white truffles, and in India is a  prominent ingredient in the cooking of the Jains, who avoid animal foods and also  onion and garlic (because they contain a bud that would otherwise grow into a  new plant).  Caraway   Caraway comes from the small herb   Carum carvi.   There are annual and  biennial forms, the first native to central Europe, the second to the Eastern  Mediterranean and Middle East. The biennial form develops a taproot the first  summer, then flowers and fruits the second; the taproots are sometimes cooked  like carrots in northern Europe. Caraway may have been among the first spice  plants cultivated in Europe; its seeds were found in ancient Swiss lake dwellings,  and have continued to be an important ingredient in Eastern Europe. The  distinctive flavor of caraway comes from the terpene D-carvone (which it shares  with dill), with citrusy limonene the only other major volatile. Caraway is used in  cabbage, potato, and pork dishes, in breads and cheeses, and in the Scandinavian  alcohol aquavit.  Celery Seed  Celery seed is essentially a concentrated, dried version of the same aromas found  in fresh celery ( Apium graveolens ), though of course it lacks the fresh green notes.  The main aromas are a distinctive celery note from unusual compounds called  phthalides, together with citrus and sweet notes. Celery seed was used in the  ancient Mediterranean and is still common in European and American sausages,  pickling mixes, and salad dressings. “Celery salt” is a mixture of salt and ground  celery seeds.  Coriander   Coriander ( Coriandrum sativum ) has been valued and cultivated since  ancient times, more for its dried fruits than its leaves, which have entirely different  flavors. The flavor of the fruit oil is startlingly floral and lemony, and makes  coriander unique and irreplaceable in the cook’s arsenal of aromas. It’s generally
used in combination with other spices, as a component of a pickling or sausage  mix, in gin and other alcohols, or as half of the coriander-cumin backbone of many  Indian dishes. Coriander is also one of the distinguishing flavors in American hot  dogs.  There are two common types of coriander. The European type has small fruits (1.5–  3 mm), a relatively high essential oil content, and a large proportion of flowery  linalool; the Indian type has larger fruits (to 5 mm), a lower oil content, less linalool,  and several aromatics not found in the European type.  Coriander seed is generally supplied whole, with the two dry fruits still enclosed in  their husk. When it’s ground along with the aromatic fruits, the brittle, fibrous husk  makes a good water absorber and thickener for sauces (the liquid portion of a  curry, for example). Coarsely ground coriander is also used to coat meats and fish  and provide flavor, crunch, and insulation at the same time.  Cumin   Cumin comes from a small annual plant ( Cuminum cyminum ) native to  southwest Asia, and was enjoyed by the Greeks and Romans; the Greeks kept it at  the table in its own box, much as pepper is treated today. For some reason cumin  largely disappeared from European cooking during the Middle Ages, though the  Spanish kept it long enough to help it take root in Mexican cooking. The Dutch still  make a cumin-flavored cheese, and the Savoie French a cumin bread, but cumin  now mainly marks the foods of North Africa, western Asia, India, and Mexico. Its  distinctive aroma comes from an unusual chemical (cuminaldehyde) that is related  to the essence of bitter almond (benzaldehyde). It also has fresh and pine notes.  Black cumin is the seed of a different species ( Cuminum nigrum ), darker and  smaller, with less cuminaldehyde and a more complex aroma. It is much used in  savory dishes of North Africa, the Middle East, and North India.  Dill Seed   Dill seed has a stronger flavor than dill weed, the feathery leaves of the  same plant ( Anethum graveolens ). It’s mildly reminiscent of caraway thanks to its  content of the caraway terpene carvone, but also has fresh, spicy, and citrus notes.  It’s   mainly   used   in   central   and   northern   Europe   in   cucumber   pickles   (the  combination goes back at least to the 17th century), sausages, condiments,  cheeses, and baked goods. Indian dill, var.   sowa,   produces a larger seed with a  somewhat different balance of aromas; it’s used in spice mixtures of northern  India.  Fennel Seed and Pollen   Fennel seed has the same anise-like aroma and sweet
taste as the stalk and leaves of the plant that bears it,   Foeniculum vulgare.   Its  dominant   volatile   is   the   phenolic   compound   anethole   (see   anise,   above),  supported by citrus, fresh, and pine notes. Most fennel seed comes from sweet  fennel varieties (p. 407) and tastes sweet; seed from the less cultivated types are  also bitter due to the presence of a particular terpene (fenchone). Fennel seed is a  distinctive ingredient in Italian sausages and in Indian spice mixes, and in India is  chewed as an after-meal breath freshener.  The fine yellow pollen of the fennel flower is also collected and used as a spice.  Fennel pollen combines anise and floral aromas, and in Italy is sprinkled on dishes  at the last minute.  Carrot family anatomy. Fennel seeds. Seeds of plants in the carrot family carry their  essential oil in hollow chambers beneath their outer ridges.
The Cabbage Family: Pungent Mustards, Horseradish, Wasabi  Of the various spices that manage to please us by causing irritation and pain, the  mustards and their relatives are unique in providing a volatile pungency, one that  travels from the food through the air to irritate our nasal passages as well as our  mouth. The active ingredients of chillis and black pepper become significantly  volatile only at high temperatures, above about 140ºF/ 60ºC, which is why roasting  hot chillis or toasting peppercorns can cause everyone in the kitchen to start  sneezing. But mustard and horseradish and wasabi can get into the nose even at  room or mouth temperature. Theirs is a head-filling hotness.  The pungency of mustards and their relatives arises from the same chemical-  defense system used by their vegetable relatives in the cabbage family (p. 321).  The plants store their irritant defenses, the isothiocyanates, by combining them  with a sugar molecule. The storage form is not irritating, but it does taste bitter.  When their cells are damaged, special enzymes reach the storage form and break it  apart, liberating the irritant molecules (and at the same time eliminating the  bitterness). Mustard seeds and horseradish roots are pungent because we grind  them up raw and encourage their enzymes to liberate the irritant molecules. When  mustard seeds are cooked — for many Indian dishes they are toasted or fried until  they pop — the liberating enzymes are inactivated, no irritants are liberated, and  their flavor ends up nutty and bitter rather than pungent.  Mustards   Mustard seed has been found in prehistoric sites from Europe to China,  and was the first and only native pungent spice available to early Europe. It has  been made into the familiar European condiment at least since Roman times; its  name in most European languages comes not from the Latin name of the seed or  plant ( sinapis ), but from the condiment, which was made with freshly fermented  wine ( mustum ), and the hot ( ardens ) seeds. Different nations have distinctive  prepared mustards whose roots go back as far as the Middle Ages. Mustard is also  widely used as the whole seed, especially in Indian cooking, and flavors a broad  range of dishes, including fruits preserved in sugar (Italian   mostarda di frutta ).  Black, Brown, and White Mustards   There are three main kinds of mustard plants  and seed, each with its own character.  •   Black mustard,   Brassica nigra,   is a Eurasian native, small and dark-hulled, with  a high content of the defensive storage compound sinigrin and therefore a  high pungency potential. It was long important in Europe and still is in India,
but is an inconvenient crop and in many countries has been replaced by  brown mustard.  •   Brown mustard,   B. juncea,   is a hybrid of black mustard and the turnip ( B.  rapa ) that is easier to cultivate and harvest. It has large, brown seeds that  contain somewhat less sinigrin than black mustard and therefore less  potential pungency. Most European prepared mustards are made with  brown mustard.  •   White or yellow mustard,   Sinapis alba   (or   Brassica hirta ), is a European native  with large pale seeds and a different defensive storage compound, sinalbin.  The irritating portion of sinalbin is much less volatile than the irritant in  sinigrin, so little of white mustard’s pungency rises into the nose. It mostly  affects the mouth, and generally seems milder than black or brown mustard.  White mustard is used mainly in the United States, in prepared mustards as  well as whole in pickle mixes.  Roman Mustard  Carefully cleanse and sift mustard-seed, then wash it in cold water, and  when it has been well cleaned, leave it in the water for two hours. Next take it  out and after it has been squeezed in the hands,…add pine-kernels, which  should be as fresh as possible, and almonds, and carefully crush them  together after pouring in vinegar…. You willfind this mustard not only  suitable as a sauce but also pleasing to the eye; for if it is carefully made, it is  of an exquisite brilliance.  — Columella,   De re rustica,   1st century CE  Making and Using Mustard   Prepared mustard condiments can be made either  from whole seeds or from powdered mustard, also called mustard flour, which has  been ground and sieved to remove the seed coat. Dry mustard seeds and their  powder are not pungent. Their pungency develops over the course of a few  minutes or a few hours when the seeds are soaked in liquid and ground, or the  preground seeds are simply moistened. The combination of moisture and cell  damage revives the seeds’ enzymes and allows them to liberate the pungent  compounds from their storage forms. Most prepared mustards are made with
acidic liquids — vinegar, wine, fruit juices — which slow the enzymes, but also  slow the later disappearance of the pungent compounds as they gradually react  with oxygen and other substances in the mix.  Once the pungency has developed, cooking will drive off and modify the irritant  molecules and so reduce the pungency, leaving behind a more generic cabbage-  family aroma. Mustard is therefore usually added at the end of the cooking  process.  Other Uses for Mustards   In addition to their chemical defenses, mustard seeds are  about a third protein, a third carbohydrate, and a third oil. When the seeds are  ground, the small protein and carbohydrate particles and dissolved mucilage from  the seedcoat can coat the surfaces of oil droplets and thus stabilize such sauce  emulsions as mayonnaise and vinaigrette (p. 628). The seedcoat of white mustard  is especially rich in mucilage (up to 5% of the seed weight), and ground white  mustard is used in sausages to help bind the meat particles together.  Mustard oil is a traditional cooking oil in Pakistan and in Northern India, where it  lends a distinctive flavor to Bengali fish dishes, pickles, and other preparations. In  much of the West, the sale of mustard oil for food use is illegal, for two reasons: it  contains large quantities of an unusual fatty acid, erucic acid; and it contains  irritating isothiocyanates. Erucic acid causes heart damage in laboratory animals;  its significance for human health isn’t known. Though our mustard condiments  contain the same isothiocyanates as mustard oil, it’s possible that daily exposure  through foods cooked in the oil could have harmful long-term effects. So far,  medical studies are inconclusive. In Asia, it’s thought that preheating the oil to the  smoking point reduces isothiocyanate content.  Horseradish   Horseradish is a west Asian cabbage relative,   Armoracia rusticana,  remarkable for large fleshy white roots rich in sinigrin and its volatile pungent  compound. Horseradish pungency develops when the raw root is grated, or when  the ground dried root is rehydrated. Horseradish doesn’t seem to have been  cultivated in Europe until the Middle Ages; today it’s used as a relish or dressing for  meats and seafood, often in the company of cream to take the edge off its strong  flavor.  Wasabi   Wasabi is the enlarged stem of an East Asian cabbage relative that also  accumulates sinigrin as a chemical defense.   Wasabia japonica   is a native of Japan  and Sakhalin Island, where it grows alongside cool mountain streams. Wasabi is
now cultivated in several countries and is occasionally available fresh in the West;  whole and partly used roots keep for several weeks in the refrigerator.  Most wasabi served in restaurants is in fact ordinary dried horseradish powder,  colored green and reconstituted with water. It has a similar pungency, but little  else in common with true wasabi. When the fresh stem is grated a few minutes  before the meal, it releases more than 20 enzyme-generated volatiles, some  pungent, some oniony, some green, some even sweet.  Dealing with an Overdose of Wasabi or Horseradish  Though a mouthful of food overdosed with chilli can be painful, it’s not as  startling as too much horseradish or wasabi, whose volatile irritants can  quickly get into the airstream and cause a bout of coughing or choking. These  reactions can be minimized by remembering to breathe out through the  mouth — sparing the nasal passages — and breathing in through the nose,  to avoid drawing irritants from the mouth into the lungs.  The Bean Family: Licorice And Fenugreek  Licorice   Licorice comes from the roots of   Glycyrrhiza glabra,   a native of southwest  Asia. Its English name is a much-altered version of its genus name, which derives  from the Greek for “sweet root.” The woody roots of this shrub are remarkable for  containing a steroid-like chemical, glycyrrhizic acid, that is 50–150 times sweeter  than   table   sugar.   The   water   extract   of   the   roots   contains   many   different  compounds,   including   sugars   and   amino   acids,   which   undergo   flavor-and  pigment-producing browning reactions with each other when the extract is  concentrated. Licorice extracts are available as dark syrups, blocks, or powders, and  are used in various confections, to give color and flavor to dark beers, porter, and  stout, and to flavor tobacco for cigars, cigarettes, and chewing. Many licorice  candies are flavored with anise-like anethole (p. 414), but licorice root itself has a  more complex aroma, with almond and floral notes.  Thanks to its hormone-like chemical structure, glycyrrhizic acid has a number of
effects on the human body, some helpful and some not. It helps soothe coughs,  but it also can disrupt normal regulation of mineral and blood pressure levels.  Licorice   is   therefore   best   consumed   in   moderation   and   infrequently;   daily  consumption can sometimes cause a significant rise in blood pressure and other  problems.  Fenugreek   Fenugreek is the small, hard seed of a bean relative,   Trigonella  foenumgraecum,   that’s native to southwest Asia and the Mediterranean. Its name  comes from the Latin for “Greek hay.” Fenugreek is somewhat bitter and has a very  distinctive sweet aroma, reminiscent of dry hay as well as maple syrup and  caramel, that comes from a chemical called sotolon, which is also an important  volatile in molasses, barley malt, coffee, soy sauce, cooked beef, and sherry. The  outer   cell   layer   of   the   fenugreek   seed   contains   a   water-soluble   storage  carbohydrate (galactomannan), so that when the seeds are soaked, they exude a  thick, mucilaginous gel that gives a pleasant slipperiness to some Middle-Eastern  sauces and condiments (Yemen’s   hilbeh ). Fenugreek is a component of various  spice mixtures, including Ethiopian berber and some Indian curry powders.  Fenugreek leaves are bitter and slightly aromatic, and are enjoyed as a fresh or  dried herb in India and Iran.  Chillis  Chillis, or “chile peppers,” the fruits of small shrubs native to South America, are the  most widely grown spice in the world. Their active ingredient, the spectacularly  pungent chemical capsaicin, protects the seeds of the chilli fruit, and appears to be  a chemical repellant aimed specifically at mammals. Birds, which swallow the fruits  whole and disperse the seeds widely, are immune to capsaicin; mammals, whose  teeth grind up the fruit and destroy the seeds, are pained by it. It’s a wonderfully  perverse achievement for our mammal species to have fallen in love with this anti-  mammalian weapon and spread the chillis much further than any bird ever did!  The success of the chilli has been remarkable. World production and consumption  are now some 20 times that of the other major pungent spice, black pepper. It is  ubiquitous in Central and South America, Southeast Asia, India, the Middle East,  and North Africa. In China the chilli is a major spice in Sichuan and Hunan  provinces; in Europe, Hungary has its paprika and Spain its pimenton. In the United  States, salsas became more popular than ketchup in the 1980s, thanks to the
influence of Mexican restaurants. Mexico remains the most advanced chilli culture,  where several different varieties may be blended to obtain a particular flavor, and  where the substance of many sauces is contributed by chillis, without the aid of  flavorless flours or starches.  Chillis and Capsaicins   There are about 25 species of   Capsicum,   most natives of  South America, of which five have been domesticated. Most of our common chillis  come from one species,   Capsicum annuum,   which was first cultivated in Mexico at  least 5,000 years ago. Chillis are hollow fruits, with an outer wall rich in carotenoid  pigments that encloses the seeds and the tissue that bears them, a pale, spongy  mass called the placenta. (For chillis as vegetables, see p. 331). Their pungent  chemicals, the capsaicins, are only synthesized by the surface cells of the placenta,  and accumulate in droplets just under the cuticle of the placenta surface. That  cuticle can split under the pressure and allow the capsaicin to escape and spread  onto the seeds and the inner fruit wall. Some capsaicin also seems to enter the  plant’s circulation, and can be found in small quantities within the fruit wall and in  nearby stems and leaves.  The chilli fruit. The pungent chemical capsaicin is secreted by cells on the surface of  the placenta, the pithy tissue that bears the seeds.  The amount of capsaicin that a chilli contains depends not only on the plant’s  genetic makeup, but on growing conditions — high temperatures and drought
increase production — and on its ripeness. The fruit accumulates capsaicin from  pollination until it begins to ripen, when its pungency declines somewhat: so  maximum pungency comes around the time that the green fruit begins to change  color.  There are several different versions of the capsaicin molecule found in chillis. This  may be why different kinds of chillis seem to produce different kinds of pungency  — quick and transient, slow and persistent — and to affect different parts of the  mouth.  Capsaicin’s Effects on the Body   The effects of capsaicin on the human body are  many and complex. As I write in 2004, the scorecard is fairly positive. Capsaicin  does not appear to increase the risk of cancer or stomach ulcers. It affects the  body’s temperature regulation, making us feel hotter than we actually are, and  inducing cooling mechanisms (sweating, increased blood flow in the skin). It  increases the body’s metabolic rate, so that we burn more energy (and therefore  retain less in storage as fat). It may trigger brain signals that make us feel less  hungry and more satiated. In sum, it may encourage us to eat less of the meal it’s  in, and to burn more of the calories that we do eat.  Of course there’s also capsaicin’s irritating effects, which can be pleasurable in the  mouth but not necessarily elsewhere. (This is why “pepper spray” is an effective  weapon; it makes breathing and seeing difficult for about an hour.) Capsaicin is  potent and oily and hard to wash off surfaces, so small amounts left on fingers can  end up hours later being rubbed into an eye. Knives, cutting boards, and hands  should be thoroughly washed with hot soapy water to avoid this and similar  unhappy surprises. On the other hand, capsaicin irritation has found a number of  medical applications; for example, when applied to the skin it helps reduce muscle  pain by increasing local blood flow.  Controlling Capsaicin Pungency   The pungency of any dish that contains chillis is  influenced by four main factors: the variety of chilli used, the amount of chilli  added, the presence or absence of the capsaicin-rich tissues, and the length of  time that the chilli is in contact with the other ingredients. The cook can reduce the  pungency of chillis substantially by cutting them in half and carefully dissecting  and removing the spongy placental tissue and the seeds.  What about quenching the burn once the mouth is already on fire? The two surest  remedies — though they’re only temporary — are to get something ice-cold into
the mouth, or something solid and rough, rice or crackers or a spoonful of sugar.  Cold liquid or ice cools the receptors down below the temperature at which they  are activated, and the rough food distracts the nerves with a different kind of  signal. Though capsaicin is more soluble in alcohol and oil than it is in water,  alcoholic drinks and fatty foods appear to be no more effective than cold or  sweetened water at relieving the burn (carbonation adds to the irritation). If all else  fails, take comfort in the fact that capsaicin pain generally fades within 15 minutes.  Chilli Varieties and Pungencies  Here is a list of common chilli varieties and their relative pungencies.  Pungency is rated in Scoville units, a measure invented around 1912 by  pharmaceutical chemist Wilbur Scoville and later adapted to modern  chemical analyses. The original method involved an overnight alcohol  extraction of the pepper, and then a tasting of increasing dilutions of the  extract until the pungency is barely detectable. The more the extract can be  diluted, the more pungent it is, and the higher the Scoville score.  Chilli Variety   Pungency, Scoville Units  Capsicum annuum  Bell   0–600  New Mexican   500–2,500  Wax   0–40,000  Paprika   0–2,500  Pimento   0  Jalapeno   2,500–10,000  Ancho/ poblano   1,000–1,500  Serrano   10,000–25,000  Cayenne   30,000–50,000  Capsicum chinense  Habanero, scotch bonnet   80,000–150,000
Capsicum frutescens  Tabasco   30,000–50,000  Capsicum pubescens  Rocoto   30,000–60,000  Capsicum baccatum  Aji   30,000–50,000  Pepper Terminology  In the United States, pungent capsicum fruits are generally called “peppers,” or  “hot peppers,” terms that stem from the early Spanish identification of  capsicum pungency with black-pepper pungency. The native Nahuatl word  was   chilli,   which gave rise to Spanish   chile,   and in turn to American   chili   (both  a capsicum-flavored stew and the powder used to make it). Chile the country  got its name from an entirely unrelated word (Araucanian for “the end of the  earth”). Given the many possibilities for confusion, I agree with Alan Davidson  and others that we should refer to pungent capsicums with the original and  unambiguous Nahuatl name   chilli.  Other Temperate-Climate Spices  Hops   Hops are the dried seed-bearing “cones” of   Humulus lupulus,   a perennial  native of the Northern Hemisphere that is a relative of marijuana and hemp. The  hop plant was cultivated in the Hallertau region of Germany by the 8th century,  and spread to Flanders by the 14th. Though now used almost exclusively in beer,  they also flavor bread and are made into an herbal tea. Hop aroma depends on the  variety, and may include woody, floral, and complex sulfur notes. It’s described in  more detail in chapter 13.  Mahleb   Mahleb or mahaleb is the dried kernel of a small kind of cherry native to
Iran,   Prunus mahaleb.   The kernels have a warm aroma vaguely suggestive of bitter  almond, and are used to flavor baked goods and sweets in much of the eastern  Mediterranean.  Mastic   Mastic is a resin exuded from the trunk of a relative of the pistachio,  Pistacia lentiscus,   a tree native to the Eastern Mediterranean that now grows only  on the Greek island of Chios. Mastic was chewed like chewing gum (hence its  name, from the same root as   masticate ), and is also used to flavor various  preparations, from breads and pastries to ice cream, candies, and alcohol (ouzo).  The main aromatic components of the gum are two terpenes, pine-like pinene and  woody myrcene. Myrcene is also the molecule from which the long resin polymers  are built. The resin is not very soluble in water, so it must be ground fine and mixed  with another powdery ingredient (flour, sugar) to help disperse it evenly in liquid  ingredients.  Nigella   The small, black, angular seed of   Nigella sativa,   a close Eurasian relative of  the common ornamental plant love-in-a-mist, tastes like a milder, more complex  version of thyme or oregano, with a hint of caraway. It’s used from India through  southwest Asia in breads and other dishes.  Saffron   Saffron is the world’s most expensive spice: a testament not only to the  labor required to produce it, but to its unique ability to impart both an unusual  flavor and an intense yellow color to foods. It is a part of the flower of a kind of  crocus,   Crocus sativus,   which was probably domesticated in or near Greece during  the Bronze Age. The saffron crocus was carried eastward to Kashmir before 500   BCE ;  in medieval times the Arabs took it westward to Spain, and the Crusaders to France  and England. (The name comes from the Arabic for “thread.”) Today Iran and Spain  are the major producers and exporters. They use saffron in their respective rice  dishes, pilaf and paella; the French in their fish stew, bouillabaisse; the Italians in  risotto milanese; the Indians in biryanis and milk sweets.  The numbers that figure in saffron production are startling. It takes about 70,000  crocus flowers to produce 5 lb/2.25 kg of stigmas, the three dark red ends of the  tube (“style”) that carries pollen down to the plant’s ovary. These 5 pounds in turn  dry down to about 1 lb/450 gm of saffron. And because they’re so delicate, the  stigmas are still harvested and separated from the other flower parts by hand, with  nearly 200 hours of labor required for that same 1 pound of dried saffron. Each  purple-petaled flower must be harvested on the same day that it begins to open,
in late autumn. Once separated, the stigmas are carefully dried, either with a 30-  minute toasting over a fire (Spain), or longer times in the sun (Iran), or in a warm  room or modern oven.  Saffron Color   Saffron’s intense color comes from a set of carotenoid pigments (p.  267) that account for 10% or more of the dried spice’s weight. The most abundant  form, called crocin, is a molecular sandwich of one pigment molecule with a sugar  molecule attached at each end. The sugars make the normally oil-soluble pigment  into a water-soluble one — and this is why saffron is easily extracted in hot water  or milk and works so well as a coloring agent for rice and other nonfatty foods.  Crocin is a powerful colorant, and gives a noticeable tinge to water even at 1 part  per million.  The saffron crocus. Pure saffron consists of the dried stigmas, the deep red tips that  catch pollen grains and send them down the long style to the ovary. Second-quality  saffron often includes the pale, relatively flavorless styles.  Saffron Flavor   Saffron flavor is characterized by a notable bitterness and a  penetrating, hay-like aroma. It arises largely from another sugar-hydrocarbon  combination, picrocrocin, which may be up to 4% of the fresh weight of the  stigmas, and is probably a defense against insects and other predators. The  combination itself is bitter. When the stigmas dry out and their cell structures are  damaged, both the drying heat and an enzyme act on picrocrocin to liberate the  hydrocarbon portion, which is a volatile terpene called safranal. Drying the saffron
stigmas thus moderates the bitterness and develops the aroma. Several chemical  relatives of safranal round out the overall aroma.  Using Saffron   Saffron is typically used in small quantities — a few threads, or a  “pinch” — and rehydrated in a small amount of warm or hot liquid before being  added to a dish, in order to extract both flavor and color. The main pigment is  water soluble, but the inclusion of some alcohol or fat in the extraction liquid will  dissolve additional fat-soluble carotenoids.  Saffron’s color and flavor molecules are readily altered by light and heat, so this  valuable spice is best stored in an airtight container in the freezer.  Sumac   Sumac is the small, dried, purplered berry of a shrubby relative ( Rhus  coriaria ) of the cashew and mango trees, a native of southwest Asia. Sumac is  unusual for being very tart (from malic and other acids), astringent (from abundant  tannins, to 4% of its weight), and aromatic, with pine, woody and citrus notes.  Sumac is ground and added to a number of savory dishes in the Middle East and  North Africa.  A Survey of Tropical Spices  Among the tropical spices, family relationships don’t readily translate into flavor  relationships. I’ve therefore listed them all in simple alphabetical order. It’s  interesting to note, though, that the ginger family includes turmeric, galangal,  cardamoms, and grains of paradise; and that allspice and clove are members of the  myrtle family, and thus relatives of each other and of two strong-scented fruits,  guava and feijoa.  Allspice   Allspice is the brown, mediumsized dried berry of a tree of the New World  tropics.   Pimenta dioica   is a member of the myrtle family and a relative of the clove.  Allspice took on its modern name in the 17th century because it was thought to  combine the aromas of several spices, and today it’s often described as tasting like  a mellow combination of clove, cinnamon, and nutmeg. It is indeed rich in clove’s  eugenol and related phenolic volatiles, with fresh, sweet, and woody notes (but no  cinnamon volatiles). The main producer is Jamaica. The berries are picked when  green and at the height of flavor, briefly fermented in heaps, “sweated” in bags to  accelerate their drying and browning, then sun-dried for five to six days (or  machine-dried). Allspice finds notable use in pickling fish, meats, and vegetables,  as well as in pie seasonings.
Annatto   Annatto, also known as achiote, is both a flavoring and a colorant. It is the  seed of a bush,   Bixa orellana,   native to tropical America, and is much used in  various cooked dishes from southern Mexico to northern South America. The  bright red-orange pigment bixin is found in the waxy coating of the seeds, and  readily changes into a number of chemical variants that are different shades of  orange, yellow, and red. Some of these are soluble in water, others in oil; large food  manufacturers use annatto extracts to give a vivid color to cheddar-style cheeses,  butter, and other products. Annatto seeds are hard, and difficult to grind finely, so  they’re often heated in a liquid to extract their flavor and color and then are  strained out. Commercially ground annatto pastes are also available. The aroma of  annatto is dominated by the woody, dry terpene humulone, which is also found in  hops.  Cardamom   Cardamom is the world’s third most expensive spice after saffron and  vanilla. It’s the seed of a herbaceous plant in the ginger family that is indigenous to  the mountains of southwest India, and was grown only there until around1900.  German immigrants then brought it to Guatamala, which is now the largest  producer. Cardamom seeds are borne in clusters of fibrous capsules that ripen at  different times, so the capsules must be picked by hand one by one, and slightly  before full ripeness, when the capsule splits. The word comes from an Arabic root  meaning “to warm”; and cardamom has a delicate, warming quality due to two  different sets of aromatics, both stored in a layer just below the seed surface: a  group of floral, fruity, and sweet terpene compounds (linalool and acetate esters),  and more penetrating, eucalyptus-like cineole.  There are two broadly different varieties of cardamom: Malabar, a small, round  capsule with a high content of delicate, flowery compounds, and Mysore, a larger,  three-angled capsule with mainly pine, woody, and eucalyptus notes. Both are  slightly astringent and pungent. Malabar cardamom develops its best flavor after  the pods have begun to turn from green to off-white, so it is usually available only  in bleached form, after sun-drying or chemical bleaching to make the pod color  more uniform. Mysore cardamom is often sold green, its color fixed by a three-  hour dose of moderate heat (130ºF/55ºC) before drying.  Cardamom is mentioned along with cinnamon in the Old Testament, but doesn’t  seem to have reached Europe until the Middle Ages. Today the Nordic countries  consume 10% of world trade, mainly in baked goods, while Arab countries take  80% for their cardamom coffee.   Gahwa   is made by boiling together freshly roasted
and ground coffee with freshly broken green cardamom pods.  Large cardamom,   also called Nepal or greater Indian cardamom, is the seed of a  cardamom relative,   Amomum subulatum,   which grows in the eastern Himalayas of  North India, Nepal, and Bhutan. (Other species of   Amomum   and   Aframomum   are  also used.) The seeds are borne in a reddish pod an inch/2.5 cm long, with a sweet  surrounding pulp. Large cardamom has a strong, harsh flavor for two reasons:  much of the crop is smoke-dried, and the seeds are rich in the penetrating  terpenes cineole and camphor. Large cardamoms are often used in India, west  Asia, and China in savory and rice dishes and in pickles.  Cinnamon   Cinnamon is the dried inner bark of trees in the tropical Asian genus  Cinnamomum,   a distant relative of the bay laurel. Its inner bark or phloem layer,  which carries nutrients from the leaves toward the roots, contains protective oil  cells. When the inner bark is cut and peeled from the new growth of these trees, it  curls to form the familiar long “quills” or sticks. Cinnamon was one of the first spices  to reach the Mediterranean; the ancient Egyptians used it in embalming, and it’s  mentioned repeatedly in the Old Testament. Asian and Near Eastern peoples have  long used cinnamon to flavor meat dishes, and thanks to the influence of the  Arabs, medieval European cooks did too. Nowadays most cinnamon goes into  sweet dishes and candies.  There are several different species of   Cinnamomum   that provide aromatic bark, but  cinnamons fall into two general categories. One is Ceylon or Sri Lankan cinnamon  (from   C. verum   or   zeylanicum ), light brown in color, papery and brittle, coiled in a  single spiral, and with a mild, delicate cinnamon flavor often described as sweet.  The other is the Southeast Asian or Chinesecinnamon, often called cassia, which is  typically thick and hard, forming a double spiral, darker in color and much stronger  in flavor, bitter and somewhat harsh and burning, as in the American “red-hot”  candy. These cinnamons come mainly from China ( C. cassia ), Vietnam ( C. loureirii ),  and Indonesia ( C. burmanii ). Cassia types are preferred in most of the world, Sri  Lankan types in Latin America. The typical hot, spicy cinnamon aroma comes from  a phenolic compound, cinnamaldehyde, of which cassia types have significantly  more than Sri Lankan types; the latter are more subtle and complex, with floral and  clove notes (linalool, eugenol).  Cloves   Cloves are among the most distinctive and strongest of all spices. They’re  the   dried   immature   flower   buds   of   a   tree   in   the   myrtle   family,   Syzygium
aromaticum,   which is native to a few islands in present-day Indonesia. Cloves were  enjoyed in China 2,200 years ago, but weren’t much used in European foods until  the Middle Ages. Today Indonesia and Madagascar are the biggest producers.  The flower buds of the clove tree are picked just before they open, and then dried  for several days. Their distinctiveness results from a high content of the phenolic  compound called eugenol, which has a unique aroma that is both somewhat  sweet and very penetrating. Clove buds contain the highest concentration of  aroma molecules of any spice. They are as much as 17% volatile chemicals by  weight, most of this stored just under the surface of the elongated portion, in the  flower cap, and in the delicate filaments of the stamens within. The oil is about  85% eugenol. Thanks mainly to eugenol, clove oil is good at suppressing microbes,  and it temporarily numbs our nerve endings, properties that have led to its use in  mouthwashes and dental products.  In much of the world cloves flavor meat dishes, while Europeans use them mainly  in sweets. Cloves are an important element in a number of spice mixes (see box, p.  398). By far their largest role is in the Indonesian flavored cigarette, kretek, which  may be 40% shredded clove.  Galangal   Galangal is a name given to the underground stem, or rhizome, of two  Asian ginger relatives,   Alpinia galanga   or greater galangal, and   Alpinia officinarum  or lesser galangal. The former, sometimes also called Thai ginger, is the more prized  and common. Galangal is more austere than ginger, pungent and with overtones  of eucalyptus, pine, clove, and camphor, but none of ginger’s lemony character. In  Thai and other Southeast Asian cuisines it’s often combined with lemongrass and  many other aromatics. Galangal is also an ingredient in Chartreuse, bitters, and  some soft drinks.  Ginger   Ginger is the pungent, aromatic rhizome of a herbaceous tropical plant,  Zingiber officinale,   that is distantly related to the banana. It lends its name to a  family of about 45 genera that are found throughout the tropics, and that include  galangal, grains of paradise, cardamom, and turmeric. The name comes via Latin  from the Sanskrit   singabera,   meaning horns or antlers, which the branched  rhizomes resemble.  Ginger was domesticated in prehistoric times somewhere in southern Asia, had  been brought in dried form to the Mediterranean by classical Greek times, and was  one of the most important spices in medieval Europe. The cake known as
gingerbread dates from this time; ginger beer and ginger ale from the 19th  century, when English taverns sprinkled powdered ginger on their drinks.  To make the dried spice, mature rhizomes are cleaned, scraped to remove most of  the skin, sometimes treated with lime or acid to bleach them, and then dried in the  sun or a machine. Dried ginger is about 40% starch by weight. Today the main  producers of dried ginger are India and China, while Jamaican ginger is considered  one of the finest. A surprisingly large fraction of the ginger trade goes to Yemen,  where it is added to coffee (as much as 15% of the coffee’s weight).  In Asia, and increasingly in the rest of the world, ginger is used fresh. Most fresh  ginger in the United States now comes from Hawaii, where the main harvest runs  from December to June. Fresh ginger contains a protein-digesting enzyme that  can cause problems in gelatin-based preparations (p. 607).  Ginger Aromas   Ginger has a remarkable culinary range, flavoring sausages and  fish dishes as well as sodas and sweets. It has something of the quality of lemon  juice in that it adds a refreshing, bright aroma — from fresh, floral, citrus, woody,  and eucalyptus notes — and mild, pepper-like pungency that complements other  flavors without dominating them. Gingers from different parts of the world have  different qualities. Chinese ginger tends to be mainly pungent; South Indian and  Australian gingers have a notable quantity of citral and so a more distinctly lemony  aroma; Jamaican ginger is delicate and sweet, African ginger penetrating.  Ginger Pungency Is Variable   The pungency of ginger and members of its family  comes from the gingerols, chemical relatives of the chilli’s capsaicin and black  pepper’s piperine (p. 394). The gingerols are the least powerful of the group, and  the most easily altered by drying and cooking. When ginger is dried, its gingerol  molecules lose a small side group of atoms and are transformed into shogaols,  which are about twice as pungent: so dried ginger is stronger than fresh. Cooking  reduces ginger pungency by transforming some gingerols and shogaols into  zingerone, which is only slightly pungent and has a sweet-spicy aroma.  Grains of Paradise   Grains of paradise, guinea grains, alligator pepper, and  melegueta pepper are all names for the small seeds of   Aframomum melegueta.   This  member of the ginger family is a native of West Africa, and was used in Europe  from the Middle Ages until the 19th century, when it became a rarity. It’s both  somewhat pungent from gingerol and relatives (paradols, shogaols), and faintly  but   pleasantly   aromatic,   with   woody   and   evergreen   notes   (humulone   and
caryophyllene). It is a component of the Moroccan spice mixture ras el hanout, and  can serve as an interesting alternative to black pepper.  Mace and Nutmeg   Mace and nutmeg have similar aromas and come from the  same source: the fruit of a tropical Asian tree,   Myristica fragrans,   which appears to  have originated in New Guinea. Along with cloves, nutmeg put the Spice Islands,  the Malaccas that are now part of Indonesia, on the maps of European sea powers.  The Portuguese and then the Dutch monopolized the nutmeg trade until the 19th  century, when the tree was successfully planted in the Caribbean and elsewhere.  Nutmeg and mace didn’t make much of an impression on European foods until the  Middle Ages. Today they provide the characteristic flavoring for doughnuts and  eggnog, and are added to hot dogs and other sausages. Nutmeg is also an  important element of the classic French béchamel sauce.  Both nutmeg and mace are borne inside the plum-to peach-sized fruits of the tree.  When the fruit is ripe, it splits to reveal a shiny, brown-black shell; and entwined  around the shell, a narrow, irregular, bright red ribbon. The red ribbon is an aril, a  fruit part whose color and sugars attract birds to carry it and the seed away. The aril  is the spice called mace, and the seed inside the shell is the nutmeg. The aril is  removed from the shell and dried separately. The aroma compounds in nutmeg are  concentrated in a layer of oil-containing tissue that weaves through the seed’s  main body of starchy and fatty storage tissue, which also contains astringent  tannins.  Nutmeg and mace have similar but distinct flavors, with mace the gentler and  more rounded. Both spices carry fresh, pine, flowery, and citrus notes, but are  dominated   by   woody,   warm,   somewhat   peppery   myristicin   (also   a   minor  component in fresh dill). Grated nutmeg includes tannic particles of the main seed  storage tissue, and is also darker in color than powdered mace. Nutmeg has  generally been put to use in sweets and dishes based on cream, milk, and eggs;  mace in meat dishes as well as pickles and ketchups. Their flavors tend to become  unpleasant with prolonged heat, so they’re often grated over a dish at the last  minute.  Nutmeg is reputed to have hallucinogenic effects if several grated seeds are  consumed at once. Myristicin has been suggested as the active ingredient, but the  evidence is scanty.  Black Pepper and Relatives   Black pepper was one of the first spices to be traded
westward from Asia, and today it remains the preeminent spice in Europe and  North America. We think of it as a basic seasoning, like salt, and use its moderate  pungency and pleasant aroma to fill out the flavor of many savory dishes, often  just before eating them. Pepper is native to the tropical coastal mountains of  southwest India, where sea and overland trade with the ancient world began at  least 3,500 years ago. It is mentioned in Egyptian papyruses, was well known to the  Greeks, and a popular spice in Rome. During this time it was largely gathered from  wild   forest   plants,   though   sometime   before   the   7th   century   the   vine   was  transplanted to the Malay archipelago, Java, and Sumatra.  Vasco da Gama discovered the sea route from Europe to southwest India in 1498,  and the Portuguese subsequently controlled exports of black pepper for several  decades. They were followed by the Dutch and, beginning around 1635, the  British, who established pepper plantations. In the 20th century, a number of  countries in South America and Africa began producing black pepper. Today India,  Indonesia, and Brazil are the major world sources.  Pepper Production   Black pepper is the small dried berry of a climbing vine in the  genus   Piper,   which includes a number of other spice and herb plants (see box, p.  429). The berries of   Piper nigrum   form on a flower spike a few centimeters long, and  take about six months to mature. As berries mature and ripen, their content of  pungent piperine continuously increases, while their aromatics reach a peak and  then decline. Fully ripe berries may contain less than half of the aroma that they  had at the late green stage. The ripe berry skin is red, but turns dark brown to black  after harvest thanks to the activity of browning enzymes. The inner seed is largely  starch, with some oil, from 3–9% pungent piperine, and 2–3% volatile oil.  Black, White, Green, and Rose-Colored   Peppers   Pepper berries are processed to  make several different versions of the spice.Black pepper, the most common, is  made from mature but unripe berries, still green and rich in aromatics. The berry  spikes are harvested from the vines and the berries threshed from the spikes. The  berries are then blanched for a minute in hot water to clean them and rupture the  cells of the fruit layer to speed the work of the browning enzymes. Finally they’re  sun-or machine-dried for several days, during which the outer fruit layer darkens.  •   White pepper consists of the pepper seed only, without the outer fruit layer.  It’s made from fully ripe berries, which are soaked in water for a week to  allow the fruit layer to be degraded by bacteria, then rubbed to remove the
fruit layer, and finally dried. White pepper is mainly valued for providing  pungency   while   remaining   invisible   in   light-colored   sauces   and   other  preparations.   It   was   developed   into   a   major   commercial   product   in  Indonesia, which is still its major producer.  •   Green pepper is made from berries harvested a week or more before they  would otherwise begin to ripen. The berries are simply preserved by treating  with sulfur dioxide and dehydration, by canning or bottling in brine, or by  freeze-drying. The flavor depends on the method of preservation, but  includes some pungency and pepper aromatics as well as a fresh green-leaf  note.  •   Pink pepper, or   poivre rose,   is a rarity made by preserving just-ripened red  berries in brine and vinegar. (Pink peppercorns are entirely different; see  below.)  Black and white pepper. Pepper comes from the small fruits of a tropical vine. Black  pepper is made by drying the whole fruit; the wrinkled dark outer coating is the dried  fleshy fruit layer. White pepper is made by removing the fleshy layer before drying the  seed.  Pepper Flavor   The main pungent compound in pepper is piperine, which is found  in the thin fruit layer and the surface layers of the seed. Piperine is about 100 times  less pungent than the capsaicin in chillis. The major aroma components in black  pepper (the terpenes pinene, sabinene, limonene, caryophyllene, linalool) create  an overall impression that is fresh, citrusy, woody, warm, and floral. White pepper is
about as pungent as black pepper, but lacks much of its aroma due to the removal  of the outer fruit layer. It often has musty and horse-stable notes, probably from  the prolonged fermentation of the fruit layer (skatole, cresol).  Pepper is used in the form of whole “corns” in preparations that allow time to  extract their flavor: such things as pickles and preserves, and some stocks and  sauces. Grinding the peppercorns allows their flavor to be extracted faster for last-  minute adjustments. Grinding also frees their aromatics to evaporate, so the most  and freshest flavor comes from whole peppercorns ground directly into the  preparation. Even whole peppercorns lose much of their aroma after a month in a  grinder. Some cooks briefly toast them in a hot pan to enrich their aroma.  Pepper is best stored tightly sealed in the cold and dark. If exposed to light during  storage, it loses its pungency because the light energy rearranges piperine to form  a nearly tasteless molecule (isochavicine).  Some Relatives of Pepper  There are about a thousand different species in the genus   Piper,   and many  relatives of   Piper nigrum   have been also been used as food flavorings,  including the herbs hoja santa and lolot (pp. 409, 410). Other notable pepper  relatives include the following:  •   Long pepper ( Piper longum ). This native of India was probably the first  pungent spice after mustard to be appreciated in Europe — the Greeks  and Romans preferred it to black pepper — and it gave us our word  pepper   via its Sanskrit name   pippali   (black pepper is   marichi ). Long  pepper is so called because it is the entire flower spike with tiny fruits  embedded in its surface. It has a somewhat more pungent taste (due to  a larger supply of piperine), and a woody aroma. Today it’s mainly used  in vegetable pickles, though it’s also found in some North African spice  mixtures. Another plant called long pepper is   Piper retrofractum,   a  native of Java and still used in Indonesia and Malaysia. It is said to be  more aromatic than Indian long pepper  •   Cubeb or tailed pepper ( P. cubeba ). This version of pepper consists of  individual berries and their tail-like stems. It is a native of Indonesia, and
was used in European cooking in the 17th century; in its home region it  still flavors sauces, liquors, lozenges, and cigarettes. In addition to  pungency, it has fresh, eucalyptus, woody, spicy, and floral aromatics.  •   Ashanti pepper ( P. guineense ). In West Africa this spice lends nutmeg  and sassafras notes to various dishes.  •   Betel leaf ( P. betle ). The clove-scented leaves of this Asian pepper  species have long been wrapped around other ingredients into a bite-  sized packet and chewed. The Indian packet, supari, includes lime, the  betel nut from the areca palm, and sometimes tobacco.  Pink Peppercorns   Pink peppercorns are fruits of the Brazilian pepper tree,   Schinus  terebinthifolius,   which was brought to the southern United States as an ornamental  and has become an invasive pest. Its attractive pink fruits were first marketed as a  kind of pepper in the 1980s. The tree is in the cashew and mango family, which  also includes poison ivy and poison oak, and its brittle, peppercorn-sized fruits  contain cardanol, an irritating phenolic compound that limits its usefulness in  foods. Pink peppercorns have fresh, pine, citrus, and sweet aroma notes thanks to  several terpenes. A close relative from Peru,   S. molle,   is also grown   as an  ornamental and is called the California pepper tree. Its fruits have a more resinous  aroma (thanks to myrcene), with less irritant cardanol.  Sichuan Pepper, Sansho   The Chinese spice known as Sichuan pepper and the  Japanese sansho both offer a strange and interesting version of pungency. They  come from two small trees in the citrus family sometimes called “prickly ash.”  Sichuan pepper trees are   Zanthoxylum simulans   or   Z. bungeanum,   and sansho trees  are   Zanthoxylum piperitum.   ( Xanthoxylum   is another spelling.) The spices are the  small dried fruit rinds, which are aromatic with lemony citronellal and citronellol.  The pungent compounds, the sanshools, are members of the same family as  piperine from black pepper and capsaicin from chillis. But the sanshools aren’t  simply pungent. They produce a strange, tingling, buzzing, numbing sensation  that is something like the effect of carbonated drinks or of a mild electrical current  (touching the terminals of a nine-volt battery to the tongue). Sanshools appear to  act on several different kinds of nerve endings at once, induce sensitivity to touch  and cold in nerves that are ordinarily nonsensitive, and so perhaps cause a kind of
general neurological confusion.  The Chinese and Japanese versions of this spice are different. Chinese Sichuan  peppercorns are always toasted, so their citrus affinities are overshadowed by  browned, woody notes that go well with meats. Japanese sansho is distinctly  lemony, and is used to mask or balance the fattiness of some fish and meats. These  spices are almost always used as part of a mixture.  Sandalwood   Sandalwood is more familiar in incense than in foods, but the roots  and heartwood of the tree   Santalum album   are sometimes used in India to flavor  sweets. Its aroma comes mainly from santalol, which has woody, floral, milky,  musky qualities.  Star Anise   Star anise is the strikingly star-shaped woody fruit of a tree in the  magnolia family,   Illicium verum,   a native of South China and Indochina. Its anise  flavor comes from the same phenolic chemical, anethole, that flavors the entirely  unrelated European anise (p. 414). The fruit itself, which may have six to eight  chambers, carries more of the flavor than the seeds, and the unripe fruit is  traditionally chewed as a breath sweetener. One traditional and important use of  star anise is in Chinese meat dishes simmered in soy sauce; when onions are  included, the result is the production of sulfur-phenolic aromatics that intensify  the meatiness of the dish.  Tamarind   Tamarind is the fibrous, sticky, aromatic, and intensely sour pulp that  surrounds the seeds in pods of   Tamarindus indica,   a tree in the bean family native  to Africa and Madagascar. The pulp can be extracted by soaking it in water for a  few minutes, squeezing the fibrous mass, and straining off the flavored water;  tamarind extract is also manufactured and sold as a thick paste. The pulp is about  20% acids, mainly tartaric, 35–50% sugars, and about 30% moisture, and has a  complex, savory, roasted aroma thanks to browning reactions that take place on  the tree as the pulp becomes concentrated in the hot sun. In much of Asia,  tamarind is used to acidify and flavor sweet-sour preserves, sauces, soups, and  drinks. Tamarind is also popular in the Middle East, and it’s one of the defining  ingredients in Worcestershire sauce.  Turmeric   Turmeric is the dried underground stem, or rhizome, of a herbaceous  tropical plant in the ginger family,   Curcuma longa.   It appears to have been  domesticated in prehistoric times in India, probably for its deep yellow pigment  ( curcuma   comes from the Sanskrit for “yellow”). Turmeric has long been used to
color skin, clothing, and foods for ceremonies surrounding marriage and death. In  the United States, the main use of turmeric is to provide color and nonpungent  filler in prepared mustards. It’s also the major component of most prepared curry  powders, making up 25–50% of their weight.  The major pigment in turmeric is a phenolic compound called curcumin, which  turns out to be an excellent antioxidant. This may explain why turmeric is  considered to have preservative properties; in India fish and other foods are often  first dusted with it before cooking, and it goes into many prepared dishes. The  color of curcumin is sensitive to pH. In acid conditions it’s yellow, while in alkaline  conditions it turns orange-red.  To make the spice, turmeric rhizomes are steamed or boiled in slightly alkaline  water to set the color and precook the abundant starch, then sun-dried. Turmeric is  usually sold preground, though fresh and dried rhizomes can be found in ethnic  markets. Turmeric has a woody, dry earth aroma (from mildly aromatic terpenes  called turmerone and zingiberene), with slight bitterness and pungency.  Vanilla   Vanilla is one of the most popular flavorings in the world. Among the  spices it’s unique for the richness, depth, and persistence of its flavor. And it’s the  second most costly, after saffron. So in fact most of the vanilla flavoring consumed  in the world today is a synthetic imitation of the original spice.  True vanilla comes from the pod fruit, often called the “bean,” of a climbing orchid  native to Central and northern South America. There are about 100 species in the  tropical genus   Vanilla. V. planifolia (or   V. fragrans ) was first cultivated by the Totonac  Indians along the eastern coast of Mexico near Veracruz, perhaps as long as 1,000  years ago. They sent it north to the Aztecs, who flavored their chocolate drinks  with it (p. 695). The first Europeans to taste vanilla were the Spanish, who gave it its  name;   vainilla   is the Spanish diminutive for “sheath” or “husk” (from the Latin  vagina ). A 19th-century Belgian botanist, Charles Morren, figured out how to  pollinate vanilla flowers by hand, and thus made it possible to produce the spice in  regions that lacked the proper pollinating insects. And the French took the vine to  the islands off the coast of southeast Africa that now supply much of the world:  Madagascar, Réunion, and Comoros, which collectively produce what is called  Bourbon vanilla.  Today, Indonesia and Madagascar are the world’s largest producers. It’s the  attentive and extensive labor required to hand-pollinate the vanilla flowers and
cure the pods, and the low production of the few regions that cultivate it, that  make vanilla so expensive.  Vanilla’s rich flavor is the creation of three factors: the pod’s wealth of phenolic  defensive compounds, preeminently vanillin; a good supply of sugars and amino  acids to generate browning-reaction flavors; and the curing process. The plant  stores most of its defensive aromatics in inert form by bonding them to a sugar  molecule. The active defenses — and aromas — are released when damage to the  pod brings the storage forms into contact with bond-breaking enzymes. The key to  making good vanilla is thus deliberate damage to the pods, followed by a  prolonged drying process that develops and concentrates the flavor, and prevents  the pod from spoiling.  Pods of the vanilla orchid. The fresh pod contains thousands of tiny seeds embedded  in a sticky resin of sugars, amino acids, and a storage form of the main vanilla aroma  compound, vanillin. The process of drying and curing the pod frees the vanillin and  creates additional aroma molecules.  Making Vanilla   The making of vanilla begins six to nine months after the orchid  flowers have been pollinated, with green pods 6–10 inches/15–25 cm long that are  just beginning to ripen. On the pod’s inner walls, thousands of tiny seeds are  embedded in a complex mixture of sugars, fats, amino acids, and phenolic-sugar  storage compounds. The enzymes that can liberate the aromatic phenolics from  storage are concentrated closer to the outer walls. The first step in curing is to kill  the pod so that it doesn’t use up its sugars and amino acids, and to damage the
pod’s cells and allow the phenolic storage compounds to migrate to the liberating  enzymes. Both of these goals are accomplished by briefly exposing the pods to  high temperatures, either in the sun or in hot water or steam. The cell damage that  this causes also allows the browning enzymes (polyphenoloxidases, p. 269) to  cluster some phenolic compounds together into colored aggregates, so the pod  color changes from green to brown.  Then follow several days during which the pods are alternately exposed to the sun  until they’re almost too hot to handle, then wrapped in cloth to “sweat” with the  residual heat. During this stage, the main flavor components of vanilla — vanillin  and related phenolic   molecules —   are   freed   from   their bondage   to sugar  molecules. The heat and sunlight also evaporate some of the pod moisture,  discourage microbial growth on the humid surface, and generate pigments and  complex aromas via browning reactions between sugars and amino acids (p.778).  It takes 3 to 5 pounds of fresh pods to produce 1 pound of cured beans.  In the last stage of vanilla processing, the pods are straightened and smoothed by  hand, dried for several weeks, then “aged,” or stored for some time to develop  flavor further (flavor compounds react with oxygen, some heat-resistant enzymes,  and each other to form fruity esters and other new notes). In Madagascar, vanilla  curing takes 35–40 days, while the Mexican process lasts several months.  The Flavors of Vanilla   The cured pod is about 20% water by weight, 20% fiber,  25% sugars, 15% fat, and the remainder amino acids, phenolic compounds, other  flavors, and brown pigments. The sugars provide sweetness, free amino acids  provide some savoriness, fat richness, and tannins some astringency. The aroma of  natural vanilla is complex. More than 200 different volatile compounds have been  found in vanilla beans. The principal one, the phenolic compound vanillin, does  suggest vanilla on its own, but without the whole spice’s richness. Some of the  other important vanilla volatiles contribute flavor notes described as woody, floral,  green-leaf, tobacco, dried-fruit, clove-like, honey-like, caramel, smoky, earthy, and  buttery.  Kinds of Vanilla   The different vanilla-producing regions produce beans with  broadly different flavors. Bourbon vanilla from Madagascar and neighboring  islands is generally considered to be the finest, with the richest, most balanced  flavor. Indonesian beans seem lighter, with less vanillin, and sometimes smoky  qualities. Mexican beans contain about half the vanillin of Bourbon beans, and
have distinctive fruity and winy aromas. Rare Tahitian vanilla beans — from a  different species,   V. tahitensis,   also have much less vanillin than Bourbon beans, but  carry unique flowery and perfumed notes.  Vanilla Extracts and Flavorings   Vanilla extracts are made by chopping whole  vanilla beans and repeatedly passing a mixture of alcohol and water over them for  several days, then aging the extract to develop a more complex, full flavor. Vanillin  and the other flavor components are more soluble in alcohol than water, so the  higher the flavor content desired in the extract, the higher the proportion of  alcohol necessary to carry it.  Artificial vanilla flavoring contains synthetic vanillin made from various industrial  by-products, especially wood lignin, and doesn’t have the full, complex, subtle  flavor of whole vanilla beans or their extracts. The demand for vanilla flavoring far  exceeds the available crop, and natural vanillin costs about 100 times more than  synthetic. About 90% of the vanilla flavoring consumed in the United States is  artificial; in France, about 50%.  The Virtues of Vanillin  In addition to making vanilla taste like vanilla, vanillin is formed during certain  cooking and manufacturing procedures, especially those involving wood fires  and wood barrels (pp. 448, 721). It thus contributes to the flavor of such foods  as grilled and smoked meats, wines and whiskeys, bread, and boiled peanuts.  Vanillin also has several potentially useful biological properties. It is toxic to  many microbes, an antioxidant, and inhibits DNA damage.  Cooking with Vanilla   Vanilla is used mainly in sweet foods. Almost half of the  vanilla flavoring consumed in the United States goes into ice cream, and much of  the rest into soft drinks and chocolate. But it also works in savory dishes: lobster  and pork are popular examples. Added with a light touch, vanilla can contribute a  sense of depth, warmth, roundness, and persistence to almost any food.  The flavor of the whole vanilla bean resides in two different parts of the bean: the  sticky, resinous material in which the tiny seeds are embedded, and the fibrous  pod wall. The first is easily scraped out of the bean and dispersed in a preparation,
while the pod itself must be soaked for some time in order to extract its flavor.  Because the volatiles are generally more soluble in fat than in water, the cook can  extract more flavor if the extraction liquid includes either alcohol or fat. Prepared  vanilla extracts can be dispersed throughout a dish instantly, and are usually best  added toward the end of cooking; any period of time spent at a high temperature  causes aroma loss.  Tea and Coffee  Tea and coffee are the most widely consumed drinks in the world, and their  popularity stems from the same source as that of herbs and spices: the plant  materials they’re made from are crammed with chemical defenses that we have  learned to dilute, modify, and love. Tea leaves and coffee beans have one defense  in common, and that’s caffeine, a bitter alkaloid that has significant effects on our  bodies. And they both contain large doses of phenolic compounds. However,  they’re very different materials. Coffee begins as a seed, a storehouse of protein,  carbohydrate, and oil, and is the creation of high heat, a robust epitome of roasted  foods and flavors. Tea begins as a new, actively growing leaf, rich in enzymes, and is  the delicate creation of those enzymes, carefully captured and preserved by  minimal heat and drying. Coffee and tea thus offer two very different experiences  of botanical inventiveness and human art.  Caffeine  Caffeine is the most widely consumed behavior-modifying chemical in the world. It  is an alkaloid (p. 238) that interferes with a particular signaling system used by  many different cells, and therefore has several different effects on the human body.  Above all, caffeine stimulates the central nervous system, relieves drowsiness and  fatigue, and quickens reaction times. It also increases energy production in  muscles and so their capacity for work. It’s said to improve mood and mental  performance, though recent studies suggest that these may be the result of  relieving the initial symptoms of overnight caffeine withdrawal! Less desirably, in  high doses it causes restlessness, nervousness, and insomnia. It has complex  effects on the heart and arteries, and can produce an abnormally fast heartbeat.  There is some evidence that caffeine speeds the loss of calcium from bone, so  habitual consumption may contribute to osteoporosis.
Caffeine reaches its maximum levels in the blood between 15 minutes and two  hours after consumption, and its levels are reduced by half within three to seven  hours. Its effects are more noticeable in people who don’t normally consume it.  Withdrawal symptoms can be unpleasant, but usually disappear within three days  of abstaining.  A chemical relative of caffeine called theophylline is found in tea and is in some  respects more potent than caffeine, but tea contains only trace amounts. Though  coffee beans are 1–2% caffeine and tea leaves 2–3%, brewed coffee contains more  caffeine than brewed tea because a larger weight of coffee is extracted per cup (8–  10 grams, vs. 2–5 grams for tea).  Caffeine Numbers  Daily caffeine consumption in milligrams per capita, 1990s  Norway, Netherlands, Denmark   400  Germany, Austria   300  France   240  Britain   200  United States   170  Caffeine content, milligrams per serving  Brewed coffee   65–175  Espresso   80–115  Tea   50  Cola   40–50  Cocoa   15  Tea, Coffee, and Health  Not so many years ago, both coffee and tea were suspected of contributing to  various diseases, including cancers, so they were among the many pleasures to feel
guilty about. No longer! Coffee is now recognized as the major source of  antioxidant compounds in the American diet (medium roasts have the highest  antioxidant activity). Black and especially green teas are also rich in antioxidant  and other protective phenolic compounds that appear to reduce damage to  arteries and cancer risk.  Certain kinds of brewed coffee do turn out to have an undesirable effect on blood  cholesterol levels. Two lipid (fat-like) substances, cafestol and kahweol, raise those  levels, though they only get into the coffee when the brewing technique doesn’t  filter them out. Boiled, plunger-pot, and espresso coffees contain them. The  significance of this effect isn’t known and may well be small, since the cholesterol  raisers are accompanied by a large dose of substances that protect the cholesterol  from oxidation and causing damage (p. 255).  Water For Making Tea and Coffee  Brewed tea and coffee are 95–98% water, so their quality is strongly influenced by  the quality of the water used to make them. The off-flavors and disinfectant  chlorine compounds of most tap waters are largely driven off by boiling. Very hard  water, high in calcium and magnesium carbonates, has several undesirable effects:  in coffee, these minerals slow flavor extraction, cloud the brew, clog the pipes in  espresso machines and reduce the fine espresso foam; in tea, they cause the  formation of a surface scum made up of precipitated calcium carbonate and  phenolic aggregates. Softened water overextracts both coffee and tea and gives a  salty flavor. And very pure distilled water gives a brew best described as flat, with a  missing dimension of flavor.  The ideal water has a moderate mineral content, and a pH that is close to neutral,  so that the final brew will have a moderately acid pH of around 5, just right to  support and balance the other flavors. Some bottled spring waters are suitable  (Volvic is used in Hong Kong). Many municipal tap waters are intentionally made  alkaline to reduce pipe corrosion, and this can reduce the acidity and liveliness of  both tea and dark-roasted coffee (light roasts contribute plenty of their own acid).  Alkaline tap water can be corrected by adding tiny pinches of cream of tartar —  tartaric acid — until it just begins to have a slightly tart taste.
Tea  Though it has lent its name to many other infusions,   tea   — from the Chinese word  cha   — is a drink prepared from the green leaves of a kind of camellia. Young tea  leaves turn out to be as packed with interesting defensive chemicals as any spice.  Beginning in southwest China around 2,000 years ago, people learned how to use  physical pressure, mild heat, and time to coax a number of different flavors and  colors from the tea leaf. Tea became a staple of the Chinese diet around 1000   CE . In  12th-century Japan, Buddhist monks who valued tea as an aid to long hours of  study found that tea itself was worthy of their contemplation. They developed the  formal tea ceremony, which remains remarkable for the attention it pays to the  simplest of preparations, an infusion of leaves in water.  The History of Tea  Tea in China   The tea tree,   Camellia sinensis,   is native to Southeast Asia and  southern China, and its caffeine-rich, tender young leaves were probably chewed  raw long before recorded history. The preparation of tea leaves for infusion in  water evolved slowly. There’s evidence that by the 3rd century   CE   the leaves were  boiled and then dried for later use, and that by the 8th century they were also stir-  fried before drying. These techniques would give green or yellow-green leaves and  infusions, and mild but bitter and astringent flavor. More strongly flavored and  orange-red teas like modern oolongs were developed around the 17th century,  probably beginning with the accidental observation that the leaves develop a  distinctive aroma and color when they’re allowed to wilt or are pressed before  being dried. It was around this time that China began to trade extensively with  Europe and Russia, and the new, more complex style of tea conquered England,  where consumption rose from 20,000 pounds in 1700 to 20 million in1800. The  strong “black” tea that’s most familiar in the West today is a relatively recent  invention, the result of intensive pressing; the Chinese developed it in the 1840s  specifically for export to the West.  The Spread of Tea Production   Until the late 19th century, all tea in world trade was  China tea. But when China began to resist Britain’s practice of paying for its  expensive tea habit with opium, the British intensified tea production in their own  colonies, particularly India. For warm regions they cultivated an indigenous variety,  Camellia sinensis   var.   assamica,   or Assam tea, which has more phenolic compounds
and caffeine than China tea and produces a stronger, darker black tea. They  planted the hardier China types in the Himalayan foothills of Darjeeling and at  high elevations in the south. India is now the world’s largest tea producer.  Today about three-quarters of the tea produced in the world is black tea. China  and Japan still produce and drink more green tea than black.  The Tea Leaf and Its Transformation   A fresh tea leaf tastes bitter and astringent,  and not much else. This is a reflection of the fact that its major chemical  component, even more abundant than its structural materials, is a host of bitter  and astringent phenolic substances whose purpose is to make the leaf unattractive  to animals. And its aromatic molecules are locked up in nonvolatile combinations  with sugar molecules. Green tea retains many of the qualities of the fresh leaf. But  the key to making oolong and black teas is encouraging the leaf’s own enzymes to  transform   these   austere   defensive   materials   into   very   different,   delightful  molecules.  How Tea Enzymes Create Flavor, Color, and Body   The period of enzyme activity  during tea-making has traditionally been called “fermentation,” but it doesn’t  involve any significant microbial activity. In tea-making, “fermentation” means  enzymatic transformation. It occurs when the tea maker presses the leaves to  break open their cells, and then allows the leaves to sit for some time while the  enzymes do their work.  There are two general kinds of enzymatic transformation in making tea. One is the  liberation of a large range of aroma compounds, which in the intact leaf are bound  up with sugars and so can’t escape into the air. When the cells are crushed,  enzymes break the aroma-sugar complex apart. This liberation makes the aroma of  oolong and black teas fuller and richer than the aroma of green teas.  The second transformation builds large molecules from small ones, and thereby  modifies flavor, color, and body. The small molecules are the tea leaf’s abundant  supply of three-ring phenolic   compounds,   which   are astringent, bitter, and  colorless. The leaf’s browning enzyme, polyphenoloxidase, uses oxygen from the  air to join the small phenolic molecules together into larger complexes (p. 269). A  combination of two phenolics gives a kind of molecule (theaflavin) that’s yellow to  light copper in color, less bitter but still astringent. Complexes of from three to ten  of the original phenolics are orange-red and less astringent (thearubigens). Even  larger complexes are brown and not astringent at all. The more the tea leaves are
pressed, and the longer they’re allowed to sit before the enzymes are killed by  heating, the less bitter and astringent and the more colored they become. In  oolong teas, about half of the small phenolics have been transformed; in black  teas, about 85%.  The red and brown phenolic complexes — and another complex, between double-  ring molecules of caffeine and the theaflavins — lend body to brewed tea, because  they’re large enough to obstruct each other and slow the movement of the water.  The evolution of tea taste. The fresh tea leaf contains rich stores of simple phenolic  compounds (catechin, left) that are colorless and bitter but not astringent. When the  tea leaf is bruised or rolled, leaf enzymes and oxygen combine the simple compounds  into larger ones with different colors and tastes. Brief enzyme action produces a  yellowish compound (theaflavin, center) that is both very bitter and astringent. More  extensive enzyme action produces a compound(theaflavin digallate, right)that is  moderately bitter and astringent. As the phenolic molecules get larger, they get  progressively darker and milder.  Making Tea  The Tea Plant and Its Leaves   The best tea is made from the plant’s small young  shoots and unopened leaf buds, which are the most tender and vulnerable and  contain the highest concentrations of chemical defenses and related enzymes. The  choice “pluck” is the terminal bud and two adjacent leaves. Most tea is now  harvested by machine, and therefore contains a large proportion of older and less  flavorful leaves.
Tea. The choicest pluck consists of the bud tip and two youngest leaves of each branch  of the tea bush.  Tea Manufacturing   The production of tea involves several different steps, some  standard and some optional.  •   The newly harvested leaves may be allowed to “wither,” or sit and wilt for  minutes or hours. Withering causes them to shift their metabolism in ways  that change their flavor, and to become physically more fragile. The longer  the withering, the deeper the flavor and color of the leaves and the brew  they make.  •   The leaves are almost always “rolled,” or pressed to break down the tissue  structure and release the cell fluids. If the leaves are rolled while they’re still  raw, this allows the leaf enzymes and oxygen to transform the cell fluids and  generate additional flavor, color, and body.  •   The leaves may be heated to inactivate their enzymes and stop the  enzymatic production of flavor and color. High dry heat will also generate  flavor.  •   The leaves are heated to dry them out and preserve them for long keeping.  •   The dry leaves are sieved and graded by piece size, which ranges from whole  leaves to “dust.” The smaller the piece, the faster the extraction of color and  flavor.  Major Tea Styles   The Chinese developed a half-dozen different styles of tea. Three  of them account for most of the tea consumed in the world.  Green Tea   Green tea preserves some of the original qualities of the fresh leaf, while  heightening them and rounding them out. It’s made by cooking the fresh or briefly  withered leaves to inactivate their enzymes, then pressing them to release their  moisture, and drying them in hot air or on a hot pan. In China, the cooking is done
on a hot pan, and this “pan-firing” produces aroma molecules characteristic of  roasted foods (pyrazines, pyrroles) and a yellow-green infusion. In Japan, the  cooking is done with steam, which preserves more of the grassy flavor and green  color in both leaf and tea.  Oolong Tea   Oolong tea is made by allowing some modest enzyme transformation  of leaf juices. The leaves are withered until they become significantly wilted and  weakened. Then they are lightly agitated to bruise the leaf edges, allowed to rest  for a few hours until enzyme action has turned the bruised edges red, pan-fired at  a high temperature, rolled, and finally dried gently, at temperatures just below  212ºF/ 100ºC. Oolong tea brews to a light amber color with a distinctive fruity  aroma.  Black Tea   Black tea is made by allowing a profound enzymatic transformation of  the leaf fluids. The leaves are withered for hours, rolled repeatedly for as much as  an hour, then are allowed to rest for between one and four hours, during which  enzyme action turns them a coppery brown and causes them to emit the aroma of  apples. Finally, the leaves are air-dried at temperatures around 100ºC, and become  quite dark.  Tea Flavor   The taste of tea, a lively, mouthfilling quality, comes from several  different sources. Tea is mildly acid and bitter and contains traces of salt. It’s also  rich in a unique amino acid, theanine, which is itself sweet and savory, and partly  breaks down during manufacturing to savory glutamic acid. Chinese green teas  also contain synergizers of savoriness (GMP and IMP, p. 342). Finally, bitter caffeine  and astringent phenolics bond to and take the edge off each other and produce  the impression of a stimulating but not harsh body. This effect is especially  important to the taste of black teas, in which it’s called “briskness.”  The aromas of different teas are strikingly different. In green teas, early application  of heat prevents much enzyme activity in the leaves. Steam heat gives grassy and  seaweed, shellfish notes to Japanese green teas (the sea notes from dimethyl  sulfide), while pan-firing and drying produce moresavory, toasted notes in Chinese  green teas. In oolong and black teas, enzyme activity liberates floral and fruity  aroma molecules from their odorless storage forms, and produces a much richer,  stronger aroma (more than 600 volatiles have been identified in black tea).  Cooks exploit tea flavor in a number of different preparations: marinades and  cooking liquids, ices and ice creams, in steamed foods, and as a source of aromatic
smoke (e.g., Chinese tea-smoked duck).  Making Green, Oolong, and Black Teas  Variations in processing produce very different colors and flavors from the  same fresh leaves.
Some Prized and Unusual Teas  Here are a number of teas made in unusual ways, with unusual qualities:  •   White tea: a Chinese green tea made almost exclusively from buds  whose hairs make them look white, withered for two to three days,  sometimes steamed, then dried without rolling.  •   Pu-erh: a Chinese green tea that is made in the usual way, then  moistened and fermented in heaps for some time by a variety of  microbes. All of its phenolic contents are converted into nonastringent  thearubigens and brown complexes, and it develops a complex, spicy,  clove aroma.  •   Lapsang souchong: a Chinese black tea, dried over smoky pine fires.  •   Scented teas: Chinese teas of various types, scented by being held for  8–12 hours in the same container with flowers, including jasmine, cassia  bud, rose, orchid, and gardenia. The packaged tea may include 1–2%  flower petals.  •   Gyokura and kabesucha: Japanese green teas made from shoots that  have been covered with bamboo boxes and almost completely shaded  for the two weeks before harvest. They develop a higher content of  carotenoid pigments that contribute violet notes to the unique  “covered aroma.”  •   Hoji-cha: Japanese green tea of standard grade that is roasted at high  temperatures (360ºF/180ºC), which triples the volatile content and so  boosts flavor.  Keeping and Brewing Tea   Well-made tea is fairly stable and can be stored for  several months in an airtight container that is kept cool and dark. Tea quality does  eventually deteriorate thanks to the effects of oxygen and some residual enzyme  activity; aroma and briskness are lost, and the color of black tea infusions becomes  less orange-red, more dull brown.  Teas are brewed in various ways in different parts of the world. In the West, a  relatively small quantity of black tea leaves — a teaspoon per 6-oz cup/2–5 gm per
180 ml — is brewed once, for several minutes, then discarded. In Asia, a larger  quantity of leaves of any tea — as much as a third the volume of the pot — is first  rinsed with hot water, then infused briefly several times, with the second and third  infusions offering more delicate, subtle flavor balances. The infusion time ranges  from 15 seconds to 5 minutes, and depends on two factors. One is leaf size; small  particles and their great surface area require less time for their contents to be  extracted. The other is water temperature, which in turn varies depending on the  kind of tea being brewed. Both oolong and black teas are infused in water close to  the boil, and relatively briefly. Green tea is infused longer in much cooler water,  160–110ºF/70–45ºC,   which   limits   extraction   of   its   still   abundant   bitter   and  astringent phenolics, and minimizes damage to its chlorophyll pigment.  In a typical 3–5 minute infusion of black tea, about 40% of the leaf solids are  extracted into the water. Caffeine is rapidly extracted, more than three quarters of  the total in the first 30 seconds, while the larger phenolic complexes come out  much more slowly.  Serving Tea   Once tea is properly brewed, the liquid should be separated from the  leaves immediately; otherwise extraction continues and the tea gets harsh. All  kinds of tea are best drunk fresh; as they stand, their aroma dissipates, and their  phenolic components react with dissolved oxygen and each other, changing the  color and taste.  Tea   is   sometimes   mixed   with   milk.   When   it   is,   the   phenolic   compounds  immediately bind to the milk proteins, become unavailable to bind to our mouth  surfaces and salivary proteins, and the taste becomes much less astringent. It’s  best to add hot tea to warm milk, rather than vice versa; that way the milk is  heated gradually and to a moderate temperature, so it’s less likely to curdle.  Lemon juice is sometimes added to tea to bolster its tartness and add the fresh  citrus note to its aroma. It also lightens the color of brewed black tea by altering  the structure of the red phenolic complexes (the complexes are weak acids  themselves, and take up hydrogen ions from the lemon juice). Alkaline brewing  water, conversely, tends to produce blood-red infusions from black tea, and can  even make green tea red.  Iced Tea   Iced tea is the most popular form of tea in the United States; it first caught  on at the 1904 World’s Fair in steamy St. Louis. It’s made by brewing tea with about  half-again as much dry tea per cup, to compensate for the later dilution by melting
ice. The addition of ice to normally brewed tea tends to make the tea cloudy, due  to the formation of particles of a complex between caffeine and theaflavin. The  way to avoid this is to brew the initial tea at room or refrigerator temperature, over  several hours. This technique extracts less caffeine and theaflavin than brewing in  hot water, so the caffeine-theaflavin complexes don’t form in sufficient quantities  to become visible in the chilled tea.  Coffee  Coffee trees are native to east Africa, and were probably first valued for their sweet  cherry-like fruits and for their leaves, which could be made into a kind of tea. Even  today an infusion of the dried fruit pulp is enjoyed in Yemen, where the seeds or  “beans” were apparently first roasted, ground, and infused in the 14th century. Our  word coffee comes from the Arabic   qahwah,   whose own origin is unclear. The  coffee tree was taken to south India around 1600, from India to Java around 1700,  and from Java (via Amsterdam and Paris) to the French Caribbean shortly  thereafter. Today Brazil, Vietnam, and Colombia are the largest exporters of coffee;  African countries contribute about a fifth of world production.  Coffee berries and seeds. Each red berry contains two seeds.  The History of Coffee Brewing   The original version of brewed roasted coffee  beans is the Arab version, which still thrives in the Middle East, Turkey, and Greece.  The finely powdered beans are combined with water and sugar in an open pot, the  mixture boiled until the pot foams, then settled and boiled to a foam once or twice  more, and finally decanted into small cups. This is the coffee that found its way to  Europe around 1600; it’s concentrated, includes some sediment, and has to be  drunk right away or the sediment will increase the already considerable bitterness.
French Refinements   The first Western modifications of coffee brewing date from  around 1700, when French cooks isolated the solid beans within the liquid by  enclosing the grounds in a cloth bag, and thus produced a clearer, less gritty brew.  Around 1750, the French came up with the most important advance before  espresso: the drip pot, in which hot water was poured onto a bed of grounds and  allowed to pass through into a separate chamber. This invention did three things: it  kept the temperature of the extracting water below the boil, it limited the contact  time between water and ground coffee to a matter of a few minutes, and it  produced a sedimentless brew that would keep for a while without getting  stronger. The limits on brewing temperature and time meant a less complete  extraction of the coffee. This reduced the bitterness and astringency, and allowed  the other elements of coffee flavor more prominence, the tartness and aroma that  were more appealing to European tastes.  Machine-Age Espresso   The 19th century brought the invention of several new  brewing methods. There was percolation, or allowing boiling water to rise in a  central tube and irrigate a bed of ground coffee. There were plunger pots, which  allowed the coffee brewer to steep the grounds, then push the grounds to the  bottom with the plunger and pour the beverage off. But the biggest innovation in  coffee brewing made its debut at the Paris Exhibition of 1855. That was Italian  espresso,   a word which means something made at the moment it’s ordered, rapidly,  and for one customer. The way to make coffee fast is to force water through the  grounds with high pressure. In the process, the pressure extracts a substantial  amount of the coffee bean’s oil, and emulsifies it into tiny droplets that create a  velvety texture and lingering flavor in the drink. Espresso is an expression of the  power of the machine to force the most and the best from a traditional ingredient  and make it into something new.  Coffee Beans  Arabica and Robusta Coffees   Coffee beans are the seeds of two species of a  tropical relative of the gardenia.   Coffea arabica,   a 15 ft/5 m tree that is native to the  cool highlands of Ethiopia and the Sudan, produces what are known as “arabica”  beans; and   Coffea canephora,   a larger tree native to hotter, more humid West  Africa, produces “robusta” beans. About two-thirds of the beans in international  trade are arabicas, which develop a more complex and balanced flavor than the  robustas. They contain less caffeine (less than 1.5% by weight of the dry bean, vs.
2.5% for robustas), less phenolic material (6.5% vs. 10%), and more oil (16% vs.  10%) and sugar (7% vs. 3.5%). Robusta varieties didn’t become prominent until the  end of the 19th century, when their disease resistance became important in  Indonesia and elsewhere.  Dry and Wet Processing   To prepare coffee beans, the ripe coffee berries are picked  from the trees, and the seeds cleaned of the fruit pulp by one of two basic  methods. In the dry method, the berries are left in the sun to dry, or first piled to  ferment for a few days, then spread out in the sun. The fruit is then removed by  machine. In the wet method, most of the pulp is rubbed from the seeds by  machine, then the remainder is liquefied by a day or two of fermentation by  microbes. The seeds are then washed in copious water, dried to about 10%  moisture, and the adherent inner “parchment shell” removed by machine. Some  sugars and minerals are leached out of wet-processed beans, so they tend to  produce coffee with less body and more acidity than dry-processed beans.  However they often have more aroma, and tend to be of more uniform quality.  Roasting   Raw green coffee beans are as hard as unpopped popcorn, and about as  tasty. Roasting transforms them into fragile, easily opened packages of flavor. Most  people let the professionals take care of roasting, but it’s a fascinating (and smoky)  experience to roast coffee at home, as cooks in many countries have long done  and still do with equipment ranging from frying pans to popcorn poppers to  special roasters.  Coffee beans are roasted to temperatures between 375 and 425ºF/190–220ºC; the  process   usually   takes   between   90   seconds   and   15   minutes.   As   the   bean  temperature approaches the boiling point of water, the small amounts of moisture  inside the cells turn into steam and puff the bean up to half again its original  volume. Then at progressively higher temperatures, the proteins, sugars, phenolic  materials, and other constituents begin to break into molecular fragments and  react with each other, and develop the brown pigments and roasted aromas  typical of the Maillard reactions (p. 778). At around 320ºF/160ºC, these reactions  become self-sustaining, like a candle flame, and extreme molecular breakdown  generates more water vapor and carbon dioxide gas, whose production rises  sharply at 400ºF/200ºC. If the roasting continues, oil begins to escape from the  damaged cells to the bean surface, where it provides a visible gloss.  When the beans have reached the desired degree of roast, the roaster cools the
beans immediately with cold air or a water spray to quench the molecular  breakdown. The result is a brown, brittle, spongelike bean, with the holes in the  sponge filled with carbon dioxide.  The Effects of Roasting on Coffee Beans  Weight Loss of Roasted Coffee Beans  Degree of Roast   Weight Loss, %  Cinnamon (375ºF/190ºC)   12, mostly moisture  Medium   13  City   15  Full city   16, half moisture and half bean solids  French   17  Italian (425ºF/220ºC)   18–20, mostly bean solids  Composition of Raw and Roasted Coffee Beans, Percent by Weight  Raw   Roasted  Water   12   4  Protein   10   7  Carbohydrate   47   34  Oil   14   16  Phenolics   6   3  Large complex aggregates that provide color, body   0   25  The Development of Coffee Flavor   The hotter the bean is roasted, the darker it  gets, and its color is a good indicator of flavor balance. In the early stages of  roasting, sugars are broken down into various acids (formic, acetic, lactic), which  together with their own organic acids (citric, malic) give light-brown beans a  pronounced tartness. As roasting proceeds, both the acids and astringent phenolic
materials (chlorogenic acid) are destroyed, so acidity and astringency decline.  However, bitterness increases because some of the browning-reaction products  are bitter. And as the bean’s color becomes darker than medium brown, the  distinctive aromas characteristic of prized beans become overwhelmed by more  generic roasted flavors — or, conversely, the flavor deficiencies of second-rate  beans   become   less   obvious.   Finally,   as   acids   and   tannins   and   soluble  carbohydrates decline with dark roasting, so does the brew’s fullness of body:  there’s less there to stimulate our tongue. Medium roasts give the fullest body.  Storing Coffee   Once roasted, whole coffee beans keep reasonably well for a  couple of weeks at room temperature, or a couple of months in the freezer, before  becoming noticeably stale. One reason that whole beans keep as long as they do is  that they’re filled with carbon dioxide, which helps exclude oxygen from the  porous interior. Once the beans have been ground, room-temperature shelf life is  only a few days.  Grinding Coffee   The key to proper coffee grinding is obtaining a fairly consistent  particle size that’s appropriate to the brewing method. The smaller the particle  size, the greater the surface area of bean exposed to the water, and the faster its  contents are extracted. Too great a range of particle sizes makes it hard to control  the extraction during brewing. Small particles may be overextracted and large  ones underextracted, and the resulting brew can be both bitter and weak. The  common propellor grinder smashes all the bean pieces until the machine is  stopped, no matter how small the pieces get, so coarse and medium grinds end up  containing some fine powder. More expensive burr grinders allow small pieces to  escape through grooves in the grinding surfaces, and give a more even particle  size.  Brewing Coffee   Brewing is the extraction into water of desirable substances from  the coffee bean, in amounts that produce a balanced, pleasing drink. These  substances include many aroma and taste compounds, as well as browning  pigments that provide color (almost a third of the total extract) and cell-wall  carbohydrates that provide body (also almost a third). The flavor, color, and body of  the finished drink are determined by how much ground coffee is used for a given  volume of water, and by what proportion of that coffee is extracted into the water.  Inadequate extraction and a watery, acid brew are caused by grinding the beans  too coarsely, so that flavor is left inside the particles, by too brief a contact time  between coffee and water, or by too low a brewing temperature. Overextraction
and a harsh, bitter brew result from an excessively fine grind, or long contact time,  or high brewing temperature.  The ideal brewing temperature for any style of coffee is 190–200ºF/85–93ºC;  anything higher extracts bitter compounds too quickly. For a standard cup of  American coffee, the usual brewing time ranges from 1 to 3 minutes for a fine  grind, to 6 to 8 minutes for a coarse grind.  Brewing Methods   There are a number of different methods for brewing coffee.  Most of them extract between 20 and 25% of the bean’s substance, and produce a  cup containing somewhere between 1.3% and 5.5% bean solids by weight. The  facing chart places some of the major styles in relation to each other. Standard  American filter-drip coffee is the lightest, and Italian espresso the strongest. The  initial proportion of coffee to water is 1:15 for American, 1:5 for espresso.  One clear lesson from the chart is that it’s always best to use too much coffee  rather than too little: a strong but balanced cup can be diluted with hot water and  remain balanced, but a weak cup can’t be improved. This principle can help avoid  problems caused by the fact that cup and coffee scoop measures vary, and that  scoops themselves are a very approximate measure (one 2-tablespoon/30-ml  scoop may deliver anywhere from 8 to 12 gm coffee, depending on grind and  packing).  Each brewing method has its drawbacks. Percolators operate at the boil and tend  to overextract. Many automatic drip brewers aren’t able to deliver near-boiling  water, so they brew for a long time to compensate, lose aroma, and extract some  bitterness. Manual drip cones give little control over extraction time. The plunger  pot leaves tiny suspended particles in the brew that keep releasing bitterness. The  Italian stovetop moka pot operates above the boil, at around 230ºF/110ºC (and 1.5  atmospheres of pressure), and produces a somewhat harsh brew. Overnight  extraction in cold water doesn’t obtain as many aromatic compounds from the  ground coffee as the hot-water methods.  Espresso   True espresso is made very quickly, in about 30 seconds. A piston or  spring or electrical pump drives 200ºF/93ºC water through finely ground coffee at  9 atmospheres of pressure. (Inexpensive household machines rely on excessively  hot steam, develop far less pressure, and take longer to brew, so the result is  relatively thin and harsh.) The proportion of ground coffee is three to four times  the amount used in unpressurized brewing, and deposits three to four times the
concentration of coffee materials in the brew, creating a substantial, velvety body  and intense flavor. These extracted materials include a relatively large amount of  Coffee Flavor, from the Bean into the Cup  This chart shows the relationships between coffee flavor and the fraction of  the coffee bean extracted into the water by various brewing methods.  Balanced flavor corresponds to an extraction of around 20% of the coffee  solids. The strength of the flavor depends on the relative proportions of coffee  and water: espresso is made with a much higher proportion of coffee than  other brews.
coffee oils, which the high pressure forces from the bean particles to form a creamy  emulsion of tiny droplets, and which contribute to the slow, prolonged release of  coffee flavor in the mouth, long after the last sip. Another unique feature of  espresso is the   crema,   the remarkably stable, creamy foam that develops from the  brew and covers its surface. It’s the product of carbon dioxide gas still trapped in  the ground coffee, and the mixture of dissolved and suspended carbohydrates,  proteins, phenolic materials, and large pigment aggregates, all of which bond in  one way or another to each other and hold the bubble walls together. (For the milk  foams often served with coffee, seep. 26.)  Methods of Brewing Coffee  This chart summarizes the important features of some common ways of  brewing coffee, and the kinds of brew they produce. The stability of a brew is  determined by how many coffee particles remain in it; the more particles, the  more bitterness and astringency continue to be extracted in the cup or pot.  Middle  Eastern/  Mediterra  nean,  Boiled  Machine  Filter  Manual  Filter   Percolator  Plunger  Pot  (French  Press)  Moka   "Espresso"  (Steam)  Espresso  (Pump)  Coffee grind   Very fine  (0.1 mm)  Coarse (1  mm)  Medium  (0.5 mm)  Coarse (1  mm)  Coarse  (1 mm)  Medium  (0.5 mm)  Fine (0.3  mm)  Fine (0.3  mm)  Brew  tempera-  ture  To 212°F /  100°C  180-  185°F /  82-85°C  190-  200°F /  87-93°C  212°F /  100°C  190-  195°F /  87-90°C  230°F /  110°C  212°F/  100°C  200°F/  93°C  Brew time   10-12 min   5-12 min   1—4  min   3-5 min   4—6  min   1-2 min   1-2 min   0.3-0.5  min  Extraction  pressure,  atmo-  spheres  1   1   1   1(+)   1(+)   1.5   1(+)   9  Flavor  Full but  bitter  ( sweeten-  ed )  Light,  often  bitter  Full   Full, often  bitter   Full   Full but  bitter  Full but  bitter   Very full
Middle  Eastern/  Mediterra  nean,  Boiled  Machine  Filter  Manual  Filter   Percolator  Plunger  Pot  (French  Press)  Moka   "Espresso"  (Steam)  Espresso  (Pump)  Body   Full   Light   Light   Light   Medium   Full   Full   Very full  Stability  once brewed   Poor   Good   Good   Good   Poor   Fair   Poor   Poor  Serving and Holding Coffee   Freshly brewed coffee is best enjoyed immediately  — its flavor is evanescent. The ideal drinking temperature is around 140ºF/ 60ºC,  where a sip won’t scald the mouth, and the coffee’s full aroma comes out. Because  it cools in the cup, coffee is usually held in the pot just below the brewing  temperature. High heat accelerates chemical reactions and the escape of volatile  molecules, so coffee flavor changes noticeably after less than an hour in the pot; it  becomes more acid and less aromatic. Coffee is best kept hot by retaining its  original heat in a preheated, insulated, closed container, not on a hot plate that  constantly supplies excessive heat from below while heat and aroma escape  above.  Coffee Flavor   Coffee has one of the most complex flavors of all our foods. At its  base is a mouth-filling balance of acidity, bitterness, and astringency. A third or less  of the bitterness is due to easily extracted caffeine, the rest to more slowly  extracted phenolic compounds and browning pigments. More than 800 aroma  compounds have been identified, and they supply notes that are described as  nutty, earthy, flowery, fruity, buttery, chocolate-like, cinnamon, tea, honeyed,  caramel, bready, roasty, spicy, even winey and gamy. Robusta coffees, with their  substantially higher content of phenolic substances than arabicas, develop a  characteristic smoky, tarry aroma that is valued in dark roasts (they are also  distinctly less acidic than arabicas). Milk and cream reduce the astringency of  coffee by providing proteins that bind to the tannic phenolic compounds, but  these liquids also bind aroma molecules and weaken the overall coffee flavor.  Decaffeinated Coffee   Decaffeinated coffee was invented in Germany around  1908. It’s made by soaking green coffee beans with water to dissolve the caffeine,  extracting the caffeine from the beans with a solvent (methylene chloride, ethyl
acetate), and steaming the beans to evaporate off any remaining solvent. In the  “Swiss” or “water” process, water is the only solvent used, the caffeine removed  from the water by charcoal filters, and the other water-solubles are then added  back to the beans. Some of the organic solvents used in other processes have been  suspected of being health hazards even in the tiny traces left in the beans (around  1 part per million). The commonest, methylene chloride, is now thought to be safe.  More recently, highly pressurized (“supercritical”) and nontoxic carbon dioxide has  been used. Where ordinary brewed coffee may contain 60–180 milligrams caffeine  per cup, decaffeinated coffee will contain 2–5 mg.  Instant Coffee   Instant coffee became commercially practical in Switzerland just  before World War II. It’s made by brewing ground coffee near the boil to obtain  aroma, then a second time at 340ºF/170ºC and high pressure to maximize the  extraction of pigments and body-producing carbohydrates. Water is removed from  the two extracts by hot spray-drying or by freeze-drying, which retains more of the  volatile aroma compounds and produces a fuller flavor. The two are then blended  together and supplemented with aromas captured during the drying stage. Instant  coffee crystals contain about 5% moisture, 20% brown pigments, 10% minerals, 7%  complex carbohydrate, 8% sugars, 6% acids, and 4% caffeine. As an essentially dry  concentrate, instant coffee is a valuable flavoring for baked goods, confections,  and ice creams.  Wood Smoke and Charred Wood  Neither wood nor the smoke it gives off is an herb or a spice, strictly speaking. Yet  cooks and makers of alcoholic liquids often use burned or burning wood as  flavoring agents — in barbecuing meats, in barrel-aging wines and spirits — and  some of the flavors they supply are identical to spice flavors: vanilla’s vanillin, for  example, and clove’s eugenol. That’s because wood is strengthened with masses of  interlinked phenolic units, and high heat breaks these masses apart into smaller  volatile phenolics (p. 390).  The Chemistry of Burning Wood  Charred wood and smoke are products of the incomplete combustion of organic  materials in the presence of limited oxygen and at the relatively low temperatures  of   ordinary   burning   (below   1,800ºF/1,000ºC).   Complete   combustion   would
produce only odorless water and carbon dioxide.  The Nature of Wood   Wood consists of three primary materials: cellulose and  hemicellulose, which form the framework and the filler of all plant cell walls, and  lignin, a reinforcing material that binds neighboring cell walls together and gives  wood its strength. Cellulose and hemicellulose are both aggregates of sugar  molecules   (pp.   265,266).   Lignin   is   made   of   intricately   inter-locked   phenolic  molecules — essentially rings of carbon atoms with various additional chemical  groups attached — and is one of the most complex natural substances known. The  higher the lignin content of a wood, the harder it is and the hotter it burns; its  combustion releases 50% more heat than cellulose. Mesquite wood is well-known  for its high-temperature fire, which it owes to its 64% lignin content (hickory, a  common hardwood, is 18% lignin). Most wood also contains a small amount of  protein, enough to support the browning reactions that generate typical roasted  flavors (p. 778) at moderately hot temperatures. Evergreens such as pine, fir, and  spruce also contain significant amounts of resin, a mixture of compounds related  to fats that produce a harsh soot when burned.  How Burning Transforms Wood into Flavor   Burning temperatures transform  each of the wood components into a characteristic group of compounds (see box,  p.449). The sugars in cellulose and hemicellulose break apart into many of the  same molecules found in caramel, with sweet, fruity, flowery, bready aromas. And  the interlocked phenolic rings of lignin break apart from each other into a host of  smaller, volatile phenolics and other fragments, which have the specific aromas of  vanilla and clove as well as a generic spiciness, sweetness, and pungency. Cooks  get these volatiles into solid foods, usually meats and fish, by exposing the foods  to the smoky vapors emitted by burning wood. Makers of wine and spirits store  them in wood barrels whose interiors have been charred; the volatiles are trapped  in and just below the barrels’ inner surface, and are slowly extracted by the liquid  (p. 721).  The flavor that wood smoke imparts to food is determined by several factors.  Above all there’s the wood. Oak, hickory, and the fruit-tree woods (cherry, apple,  pear) produce   characteristic   and   pleasing   flavors   thanks   to   their   moderate,  balanced quantities of the wood components. A second important factor is the  combustion temperature, which is partly determined by the wood and its moisture  content. Maximum flavor production takes place at relatively low, smoldering  temperatures, between 570 and 750ºF/300–400ºC; at higher temperatures, the
flavor molecules are themselves broken down into simpler harsh or flavorless  molecules. High-lignin woods burn too hot unless their combustion is slowed by  restricted airflow or a high moisture content. When smoking is done by throwing  wood chips onto glowing charcoal, the wood chips should be pre-soaked in water  so that they’ll cool the coals. Because it’s largely pure carbon, charcoal burns  mostly smokelessly at temperatures approaching 1,800ºF/1,000ºC.  Though smoke helps stabilize the flavors of meats and fish, smoke flavor itself is  unstable. The desirable phenolic compounds are especially reactive, and largely  dissipate in a few weeks or months.  Wood Components and Smoke Flavors  Wood Component % of  dry weight  Combustion  Temperature  Combustion By-Products and Their  Aromas  Cellulose (cell-wall frame,  from glucose) 40–45%  540–610ºF  280–320ºC  Furans: sweet, bready, floral Lactones:  coconut, peach Acetaldehyde: green  apple  Hemicellulose (cell-wall  filler, from mixed sugars)  20–35%  390–480ºF   Acetic acid: vinegar 200–250ºC  Diacetyl: buttery  Lignin (cell-wall  strengthener, from  phenolic compounds)  20–40%  750ºF 400ºC   Guaiacol: smoky, spicy Vanillin: vanilla  Phenol: pungent, smoky Isoeugenol:  sweet, cloves Syringol: spicy, sausage-  like  The Toxins in Wood Smoke: Preservatives and Carcinogens   In the beginning,  smoking was not just a way of giving foods an interesting flavor: it was a way of  delaying their spoilage. Wood smoke contains many chemicals that slow the  growth of microbes. Among them are formaldehyde, and acetic acid (vinegar) and  other organic acids, thanks to which the pH of smoke is a very microbe-unfriendly  2.5. Many of the phenolic compounds in wood smoke are also antimicrobials, and  phenol itself is a strong disinfectant. The phenolic compounds are also effective  antioxidants, and slow the development of rancid flavors in smoked meats and
fish.  In   addition   to   antimicrobial   compounds,   smoke   also   contains   antihuman  compounds, substances that are harmful to our long-term health. Prominent  among these are the polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons, or PAHs, which are proven  carcinogens and are formed from all of the wood components in increasing  amounts as the temperature is raised. Hot-burning mesquite wood generates  double the quantity that hickory wood does. The deposition of PAHs on meat can  be minimized by limiting the fire temperature, keeping the meat as far as possible  from the fire, and allowing free air circulation to carry soot and other PAH-  containing particles away. Commercial smokers use air filters and temperature  control for these purposes.  Liquid Smoke  Liquid smoke is essentially smoke-flavored water. Smoke consists of two phases:  microscopic droplets that make it visible as a haze, and an invisible vapor. It turns  out that much of the flavor and preservative materials are in the vapor, while the  droplets are largely aggregates of tars, resins, and heavier phenolic materials,  including the PAHs. PAHs are largely insoluble in water, while most of the flavor  and preservative compounds do dissolve to some extent. This difference makes it  possible to separate most of the PAHs from the vapors and dissolve the vapors in  water. Cooks then use this liquid extract of smoke to flavor foods. Toxicological  studies of liquid smoke have found that though it is full of biologically active  compounds, the quantities normally used in foods are harmless. Those PAHs that  do make it into liquid smoke tend to aggregate and sink over time, so it’s best not  to shake bottles of liquid smoke before use. Leave the sediment at the bottom.  Object 8
Seeds: Grains, Legumes, and Nuts  Seeds as Food  Seeds are our most durable and concentrated foods. They’re rugged lifeboats,  designed to carry a plant’s offspring to the shore of an uncertain future. Tease  apart a whole grain, or bean, or nut, and inside you find a tiny embryonic shoot. At  harvest time that shoot had entered suspended animation, ready to survive  months of drought or cold while waiting for the right moment to come back to life.  The bulk of the tissue that surrounds it is a food supply to nourish this rebirth. It’s  the distillation of the parent plant’s lifework, its gathering of water and nitrogen  and minerals from the soil, carbon from the air, and energy from the sun. And as  such it’s an invaluable resource for us and other creatures of the animal kingdom  who are unable to live on soil and sunlight and air. In fact, seeds gave early humans  both the nourishment and the inspiration to begin to shape the natural world to  their own needs. Ten thousand turbulent years of civilization have unfolded from  the seed’s pale repose.  The story began when inhabitants of the Middle East, Asia, and Central and South  America learned to save some large, easily harvested seeds from wild plants, and  sow them in clearings to produce more seeds of a similar kind. It appears that  agriculture first arose in the highlands of southeastern Turkey, around the upper  reaches of the Tigris and Euphrates rivers, and in the Jordan River valley. The first  plants to be brought under human selection there were einkorn and emmer  wheat, barley, lentil, pea, bitter vetch, and chickpea: a mixture of seed-bearing  cereals and legumes. Gradually the nomadic life of the hunter-gatherer gave way  to growing settlements alongside the large grainfields that fed them. The need  arose for planning the sowing and the distribution of the harvests, for anticipating  seasonal changes before they occurred, for organizing the work, and for keeping  records. Some of the earliest known writing and arithmetical systems, dating from  at least 5,000 years ago, are devoted to the accounting of grain and livestock. So  the culture of the fields encouraged the culture of the mind. At the same time it  brought problems, among them a drastic simplification of the hunter-gatherer’s
varied diet and consequent damage to human health, and the development of a  social hierarchy in which a few benefit from the labor of many.  Seeds of Thought  The development of agriculture had a deep influence on human feeling and  thought, on mythology and religion and science, that is hard to capture in a  few quotations. The religious historian Mircea Eliade summarized it this way:  We are used to thinking that the discovery of agriculture made a  radical change in the course of human history by ensuring adequate  nourishment and thus allowing a tremendous increase in the  population. But the discovery of agriculture had decisive results for a  quite different reason…. Agriculture taught man the fundamental  oneness of organic life; and from that revelation sprang the simpler  analogies between women and field, between the sexual act and  sowing, as well as the most advanced intellectual syntheses: life as  rhythmic, death as a return, and so on. These syntheses were essential  to man’s development, and were possible only after the discovery of  agriculture.  —   Patterns in Comparative Religion , 1958  In the   Odyssey,   Homer called wheat and barley “the marrow of men’s bones.” It’s  less obvious to us in the modern industrialized world than it has been through  much of human history, but seeds remain the essential food of our species. Grains  directly provide the bulk of the caloric intake for much of the world’s population,  especially in Asia and Africa. The grains and legumes together provide more than  two-thirds of the world’s dietary protein. Even the industrial countries are fed  indirectly by the shiploads of corn, wheat, and soybeans on which their cattle,  hogs, and chickens are raised. The fact that the grains come from the grass family  adds a layer of significance to the Old Testament prophet Isaiah’s admonishment  that “All flesh is grass.”  As ingredients, seeds have much in common with milk and eggs. All consist of  basic nutrients created to nourish the next generation of living things; all are
relatively simple and bland in themselves, but have inspired cooks to transform  them into some of the most complex and delightful foods we have.  Some Definitions  Seeds   Seeds are structures by which plants create a new generation of their kind.  They   contain   an   embryonic   plant   together   with   a   food   supply   to   fuel   its  germination and early growth. And they include an outer layer that insulates the  embryo from the soil and protects it from physical damage and from attack by  microbes or animals.  An oat kernel, lentils in their pod, and a hazelnut. All are seeds, and consist of a living  embryonic plant together with a food supply to fuel its early growth. In the cereal  grains, the food supply is a separate tissue, the endosperm. In the beans and their  relatives, and in most nuts, the food supply fills the first two leaves of the embryo, the  cotyledons, which are unusually massive and thick.  The most important seeds in the kitchen fall into three groups.  Grains, or Cereals   These words are near synonyms. The   cereals   (from   Ceres,   the  Roman goddess of agriculture) are plants in the grass family, the Gramineae,  whose members produce edible and nutritious seeds, the   grains.   But   cereal   is also  used to mean their seeds and products made from them — as in “breakfast cereals”  — and the plants are sometimes called   grains.   The cereals and other grasses are  creatures of the open plain or high-altitude steppe, areas too dry for trees. They
live and die in a season or two, and are easily gathered and handled. They grow in  densely packed stands that crowd out competition, and produce many small  seeds, relying on numbers rather than chemical defenses to ensure that some  offspring will survive. These characteristics made the grasses ideal for agriculture.  With our help, they have come to cover vast areas of the globe.  Wheat, barley, oats, and rye have been the most important grains in the Middle  East and Europe; in Asia, rice; in the New World, maize, or corn; in Africa sorghum  and millets. The grains are of special culinary significance because they make  possible beer and bread, both staples in the human diet for at least 5,000 years.  Legumes   The   legumes   (from the Latin   legere,   “to gather”) are plants in the bean  family, the Leguminosae, whose members bear pods that contain several seeds.  The term   legume   is also used to name their seeds. Many legumes are vines that  climb on tall grasses and other plants to reach full sunlight, and like the grasses  grow, go to seed, and die over a few months. The legumes produce seeds that are  especially rich in protein, thanks to their symbiosis with bacteria that live in their  roots and feed them with nitrogen from the air. The same symbiosis means that  legumes actually enrich the soil they grow in with nitrogen compounds, which is  why various legumes have been grown as rotation crops at least since Roman  times. Their relatively large seeds are attractive to animals, and it’s thought that  much of the remarkable diversity in the beans and peas is the result of survival  pressures exerted by insects. Legume seeds are camouflaged by colored coats, and  protected with an array of several biochemical defenses.  Lentils, broad beans, peas, and chick peas are all native to the Fertile Crescent of  the Near East. They were adapted for sprouting and quickly reproducing in the  cool, wet season before the summer drought, and were the first substantial foods  to ripen in the spring. The soy and mung beans were indigenous to Asia, and  peanuts, lima beans, and common beans to the Americas.  Nuts   The   nuts   (from an Indo-European root meaning “compressed”) come from  several different plant families, not just one. They are generally large seeds  enclosed in hard shells, and borne on long-lived trees. The seeds are large both to  make them attractive to animal dispersers (which bury some for later use and  effectively plant the ones they forget), and to give the seedling an adequate food  supply for slow, prolonged growth in the partial shade. Most of them store their  energy not in starch but in oil, a more compact, concentrated chemical form (p.
121).  Nuts are much less important in the human diet than grains or legumes because  nut trees don’t begin to bear until years after they’re planted, and can’t produce as  much per acre as the quick-growing grains and legumes. The biggest exception to  this rule is the coconut, a staple food in many tropical countries. Another is the  peanut, which is a legume with an uncharacteristically oily, tender seed, and which  can be grown quickly in massive numbers.  Seeds and Health  Our seed foods provide us with many nutritional benefits. To begin with, they’re  our most important staple sources of energy and protein, and carry the B vitamins  that are required for the chemical work of generating energy and building tissue.  In fact, they’re such a good source of these essential nutrients that cultures have  occasionally relied on the grains too heavily, and suffered from dietary deficiencies  as a result. The debilitating disease called beriberi plagued rice-eating Asia in the  19th century when milling machines made it easier to remove the inconvenient,  unattractive outer bran layer from rice grains — and along with it their thiamin,  which the rest of the largely vegetarian diet couldn’t make up (meats and fish are  rich in thiamin). A different deficiency disease called pellagra struck the rural poor  in Europe and the southern United States in the 18th and 19th centuries, when  they adopted corn from Central and South America as a staple food, but without  the processing method (cooking in alkaline water) that makes its stores of niacin  available to the human body.  Beriberi and pellagra led early in the 20th century to the discovery of the vitamins  whose deficiencies cause them. Today, even though most people in Asia eat  refined rice, and polenta and grits are still not cooked in alkaline water, more  balanced diets have made these deficiency diseases far less common.  Valuable Phytochemicals From Seeds  Toward the end of the 20th century, we came to realize that seeds have more to  offer us than the basic machinery of life. Epidemiological studies have found a  general association between the consumption of whole grains, legumes, and nuts  and a reduced risk of various cancers, heart disease, and diabetes. What do these
foods provide that refined grains do not? Hundreds or even thousands of  chemicals that are concentrated in the outer protective and active layers of the  seeds, and that are not found in inner storage tissues, which are mainly depots of  starch and protein. Among the chemicals that have been identified and seem likely  to be helpful are  •   a variety of vitamins, including antioxidant vitamin E and its chemical  relatives the tocotrienols  •   soluble fiber: soluble but undigestible carbohydrates that slow digestion,  moderate blood insulin and blood sugar levels, and reduce cholesterol  levels, and provide energy for beneficial intestinal bacteria, which alter their  chemical   environment,   suppress   the   growth   of   harmful   bacteria,   and  influence the health of intestinal cells  •   insoluble fiber, which speeds passage of food through the digestive system  and reduces our absorption of carcinogens and other undesirable molecules  •   a variety of phenolic and other defensive compounds, some of which are  effective antioxidants, some of which resemble human hormones and may  restrain cell growth and thereby the development of cancer  Medical scientists are still in the early stages of identifying and evaluating these  substances, but in general it looks as though regular consumption of whole grains,  legumes, and nuts can indeed make a real contribution to our long-term health.  Problems Caused by Seeds  Seeds are not perfect foods. Legumes in particular contain defensive chemicals —  lectins and protease inhibitors — that can cause malnourishment and other  problems. Fortunately, simple cooking disarms these defenses (p. 259). The fava  bean contains amino-acid relatives that cause serious anemia in susceptible  people (p. 490), but both the bean and the susceptibility are relatively rare. Two  other problems are more common.  Seeds are Common Food Allergens  True food allergies are overreactions of the body’s immune system, which mistakes  a food component as a sign of invasion by a bacterium or virus and initiates a  defense that damages the body. The damage may be mild and manifest itself as  discomfort, itchiness, or a rash, or it may be a life-threatening asthma or change in
blood pressure or heart rhythm. It’s estimated that about 2% of adults in the  United States have one or more food allergies, and up to 8% of young children.  Allergic reactions to food cause around 200 deaths per year in the United States.  Peanuts, soybeans, and tree nuts are among the most common food allergens. The  offending components are usually seed proteins, and cooking does not render  them less allergenic. Tiny quantities of nut proteins are sufficient to cause  reactions, including the levels sometimes found in mechanically extracted nut oils.  Gluten Sensitivity   A special form of food allergy is the disease called gluten-  sensitive enteropathy, celiac disease, or sprue, in which the body forms defensive  antibodies against a portion of the harmless gliadin proteins in wheat, barley, rye,  and possibly oats. These defenses end up attacking the nutrient-absorbing cells in  the intestine, and therefore cause serious malnourishment. Celiac disease can  develop in early childhood or later, and is a lifelong condition. The standard  remedy is strict avoidance of all gluten-containing foods. Several grains don’t  contain gliadin proteins and therefore don’t aggravate celiac disease; they are  corn, rice, amaranth, buckwheat, millet, quinoa, sorghum, and teff.  Seeds and Food Poisoning  Seeds are generally dry, with only about 10% of their weight coming from water.  As a result, they keep well without special treatment; and because we prepare  them by thoroughly boiling or roasting them, freshly cooked grains, beans, and  nuts generally don’t carry bacteria that cause food poisoning. However, moist  grain and bean dishes become very hospitable to bacteria as they cool down.  Leftovers should be refrigerated promptly and reheated to the boil before serving.  Rice dishes are particularly vulnerable to contamination by   Bacillus cereus   and  require special care (p. 475).  Even dry seeds aren’t entirely immune to contamination and spoilage. Molds, or  fungi, are able to grow with relatively little moisture, and can contaminate seed  crops both in the field and in storage. Some synthesize deadly toxins that can  cause cancer and other diseases (for example, species of   Aspergillus   produce a  carcinogen called aflatoxin, and   Fusarium moniliforme   produces another called  fumonisin). The presence of fungal toxins in our foods is generally invisible to the  consumer, and is monitored by producers and government agencies. They’re not  now considered a major health risk. But the least sign of mold or other spoilage on
grains and nuts means that the food should be discarded.  The Composition and Qualities of Seeds  Parts of the Seed  All of our food seeds consist of three basic parts: an outer protective coat, a small  embryonic portion capable of growing into the mature plant, and a large mass of  storage tissue that contains proteins, carbohydrates, and oils to feed the embryo.  Each part influences the texture and flavor of the cooked seeds.  The outer protective coat, called the   bran   in grains and the   seed coat   in legumes  and nuts, is a dense sheet of tough, fibrous tissue. It’s rich in defensive or  camouflaging   phenolic   compounds,   including   anthocyanin   pigments   and  astringent tannins. And it slows the passage of water into grains and legumes  during cooking. It’s often removed from grains (especially rice and barley),  legumes (notably in Indian dals), and nuts (almonds, chestnuts) to speed the  cooking and obtain a more refined appearance, texture, and flavor.  The embryonic portion of legumes and nuts is not of much practical significance,  but the germ of the grains is: it contains much of the oil and enzymes in these  seeds, and thus is the source of potential flavor, both desirable cooked aromas and  undesirable stale ones.  The bulk of the seed is a mass of storage tissue, and its makeup determines the  seed’s basic texture. The storage cells are filled with particles of concentrated  protein, granules of starch, and sometimes with droplets of oil. In some grains,  notably   barley,   oats,   and   rye,   the   cell   walls   are   also   filled   with   storage  carbohydrates — not starch, but other long sugar chains that like starch can  absorb water during cooking. The strength of the cement that holds the storage  cells together, and the nature and proportions of the materials they contain,  determine the seed’s texture. Bean cells and grain cells are filled with solid, hard  starch granules and protein bodies; most nut cells are filled with liquid oil, and so  are more fragile. Grains retain their shape and some firmness even when we mill  away their protective bran envelope and boil them in plenty of water. Beans  remain intact as long as we cook them in their seed coats; otherwise they rapidly  disintegrate into a puree.
The particular contents of the seed storage cells influence texture and culinary  usefulness in a number of ways. So it’s worth knowing about the proteins, starches,  and oils in some detail.  Seed Proteins: Soluble and Insoluble  Seed proteins are classified by a particular aspect of their chemical behavior, which  also determines their behavior during cooking: the kind of liquid in which they  dissolve. This may be pure water, water and some salt, water and dilute acid, or  alcohol (these types are called “albumins,” “globulins,” “glutelins,” and “prolamins”).  Most of the proteins in legumes and nuts are soluble in a salt solution or water  alone, so during ordinary cooking in salted water, bean and pea proteins become  dispersed in the moisture within the seeds and the cooking liquid surrounding  them. By contrast, the main storage proteins in wheat, rice, and other grains are  acid-soluble and alcohol-soluble types. In ordinary water, these proteins don’t  dissolve; instead they bond to each other and clump up into a compact mass.  Wheat, rice, corn, and barley kernels develop a chewy consistency in part because  their insoluble proteins clump together in the grain during cooking and form a  sticky complex with the starch granules.  The Proportions of Proteins in Seeds  Water-  soluble  albumins  Water-salt-  soluble globulins  Acid-  soluble  glutelins  Alcohol-  soluble  prolamins  Wheat   10   5   40-45   33-45  Barley   10   10   50-55   25-30  Rye   10-45   10-20   25-40   20-40  Oats   10-20   10-55   25-55   10-15  Rice   10   10   75   5  Corn   5   5   35-45   45-55
Water-  soluble  albumins  Water-salt-  soluble globulins  Acid-  soluble  glutelins  Alcohol-  soluble  prolamins  Beans,  peas  10   55-70   15-30   5  Almonds   30   65  Seed Starches: Orderly and Disorderly  All the grains and legumes contain a substantial amount of starch, enough that it  plays a significant role in the texture of the cooked seeds and their products. It can  make one grain variety behave very differently from another variety of the same  grain.  Two Kinds of Starch Molecules   The parent plant lays down starch molecules in  microscopic, solid granules that fill the cells of the seed storage tissue. All starch  consists of chains of individual molecules of the sugar called glucose (p. 804). But  there are two different kinds of starch molecules in starch granules, and they  behave very differently.   Amylose   molecules are made from around 1,000 glucose  sugars, and are mainly one extended chain, with just a few long branches.  Amylopectin   molecules are made from 5,000 to 20,000 sugars and have hundreds  of short branches. Amylose is thus a relatively small, simple molecule that can  easily settle into compact, orderly, tightly bonded clusters, while amylopectin is a  large, bushy, bulky molecule that doesn’t cluster easily or tightly. Both amylose and  amylopectin are packed together in the raw starch granule, in proportions that  depend on the kind and variety of seed. Legume starch granules are 30% or more  amylose, and wheat, barley, maize, and long-grain rice granules are around 20%.  Short-grain rice granules contain about 15% amylose, while “sticky” rice starch  granules are almost pure amylopectin.  Cooking Separates Starch Molecules and Softens Granules   When a seed is  cooked in water, the starch granules absorb water molecules, and swell and soften  as the water molecules intrude and separate the starch molecules from each other.  This granule softening, or   gelation,   takes place in a temperature range that
depends on the seed and starch, but is in the region of 140–160ºF/60–70ºC. (The  conversion   of   solid   starch   into   a   starch-water   gel   is   often   referred   to   as  “gelatinization,” but this is unnecessarily confusing; starch has nothing to do with  gelatin.)   The   tightly   ordered   clusters   of   amylose   molecules   require   higher  temperatures, more water, and more cooking time to be pulled and kept apart  than do the looser clusters of amylopectin molecules. This is why long-grain  Chinese rices are made with more water than short-grain Japanese rices.  Cooling Reorganizes Starch Molecules and Firms Granules   Once the cooking is  finished and the seeds cool down below the gelation temperature, the starch  molecules begin to re-form some clusters with pockets of water in between, and  the soft, gelated starch granules begin to firm up again. This process is called  retrogradation.   The simpler amylose molecules start bonding to each other again  almost   immediately,   and   finish   within   a   few   hours   at   room   or   refrigerator  temperatures. Sprawling, bushy amylopectin molecules take a day or more to  reassociate, and form relatively loose, weak clusters. This difference explains why  long-grain rices high in amylose have a firm, springy texture when served right  after cooking and get inedibly hard when refrigerated overnight, while short-grain  rices low in amylose have a softer, sticky texture and harden much less during  overnight refrigeration. The hardness of all leftover grains can be largely remedied  simply by reheating and so regelating their starch.  Starch Firming Can Be Useful   Reheated grains never get quite as soft as they  were when first cooked. This is because during the process of retrogradation,  amylose molecules manage to form some clusters that are even more highly  organized than the clusters in the original starch granule, crystalline regions that  resist breaking even at boiling temperatures. These regions act as reinforcing  junctions in the overall network of amylose and amylopectin molecules, and give  the   granules   greater   strength   and   integrity.   Cooks   take   advantage   of   this  strengthening to make bread puddings and starch noodles; parboiled (converted)  rice and American breakfast cereals keep their shape because much of their starch  has been allowed to retrograde during manufacturing. And it turns out that  retrograded starch is good for our bodies! It resists our digestive enzymes and  therefore slows the rise in blood sugar following a meal, and feeds desirable  bacteria in the large intestine (p. 258).
Starch gelation and retrogradation. Starch granules are compact, organized masses of  long starch chains (left) . When a starchy cereal is cooked, water penetrates the granule  and separates the chains from each other, thus swelling and softening the granule in the  process called gelation (center) . When the cooked cereal cools down, the starch chains  slowly rebond to each other in tighter, more organized associations, and the granule  becomes firmer and harder, a process called retrogradation (right).  Seed Oils  Nuts and soybeans are rich in oil, which is kept in the mass of storage tissue in tiny  packages called oil bodies. Each is a tiny oil droplet whose surface is covered with  two protective materials: phospholipid relatives of lecithin, and proteins called  oleosins. The surface coating prevents the oil droplets from pooling together. Seed  oil bodies are very similar in size and structure to the fat globules in animal milk.  This is why when we eat nuts, they become creamy in the mouth rather than  simply greasy. It’s also one reason why for a thousand years cooks have made  “milks” from almonds, soybeans, and other oil-rich seeds (pp. 494, 504).  Seed Flavors  The most important contributors to the flavors of grains, legumes, and nuts are  fragments of the unsaturated fatty acids in the oils and cell membranes, which  have individual aromas described as green, fatty, oily, floral, and mushroomy. The  outer bran layer grains contains the bulk of the seed’s oils and enzymes, and so  gives whole grains a stronger flavor, as well as contributing some vanilla and  toasted notes from its phenolic compounds. Beans are especially rich in green and
mushroom notes. Nuts, which are usually cooked with dry heat, contain products  of the browning reactions with typical roasted aromas. The flavors of particular  seeds are described below.  Handling and Preparing Seeds  Preparations of particular seeds are described in more detailed surveys below.  Here are some common aspects of using seeds in the kitchen.  Storing Seeds  Because most of the seeds we eat are designed to survive a dormant, dry period,  they are the easiest food ingredients to store. Whole seeds keep well for months in  a dry, cool, dark place. Moisture encourages the growth of spoilage microbes, and  physical damage, heat and light can accelerate the oxidation of seed oils that leads  to stale, rancid aromas and bitter tastes.  The pest that sometimes infests grains, beans, nuts, and flours is the Indian meal  moth ( Plodia interpunctella ). It originally came from ears of grain in the field but is  now a common inhabitant of our pantries, where its eggs hatch into larvae that  consume the seeds and generate unpleasant smells. There’s nothing to do with a  contaminated batch but discard it. Keeping seeds in separate glass or plastic jars  will prevent one batch from contaminating another.  Sprouts  The sprouted seed is a culinary custom of ancient lineage in Asia, but a very recent  arrival in the West. Thanks to the sprout, anyone, anytime — even an apartment-  dweller in Anchorage in February — can raise a good approximation to fresh  vegetables with very little effort. Sprouting often improves a seed’s vitamin  content and digestibility. And with their nutty flavor and crisp texture, sprouts are  simply a nice change from the usual vegetables.  Beans are most commonly sprouted, but many of our food seeds can be sprouted  to advantage. Sprouted wheat and barley, for example, develop a sweetness as  their enzymes begin to break down stored starch into sugars for the embryonic  plant. Sprouts have a nutritional value midway between that of the dry seed,  which they just were, and a leafy green vegetable, which they’re on the way to
becoming. Sprouts are higher in vitamin C and lower in calories than most seeds,  and higher than most vegetables in protein (5% versus about 2%) and in the B  vitamins and iron.  Cooking Seeds  Seeds are the driest and hardest ingredients that cooks deal with. Most require  both moisture and heat to make them edible. Most, but not all: the nuts are  generally edible and nutritious fresh out of the shell or after a brief application of  dry heat, thanks to their relatively tender cell walls and the cells’ content of liquid  oil rather than solid starch. But dry grains and legumes are hard and starchy. Hot  water softens them by dissolving the strengthening carbohydrates from their cell  walls, and moving into the cells to gelate the starch granules and either dissolve or  moisten the storage proteins. This makes the seed more nutritious by exposing its  nutrients to our digestive enzymes.  There are a few simple facts to remember about cooking grains and legumes in  water.  •   The outer bran layer or seed coat is designed to control the passage of soil  moisture into the embryo and storage tissues during germination. It also  slows the passage of cooking water. Seeds that have been milled free of their  coats or into small pieces cook much faster than whole seeds.  •   Heat penetrates seeds faster than water can, so much of the cooking time is  moistening time. Presoaking seeds for a few hours or overnight can cut  cooking times by half or more.  •   Most seeds get quite soft when they’ve absorbed enough liquid to be about  60–70% water by weight. That quantity of water is the equivalent of about  1.7 times the dry weight of the seeds, or about 1.4 times their volume.  Recipes generally call for much more water than this to allow for water lost  to evaporation during cooking.  •   The texture of fully cooked seeds is soft and fragile at cooking temperatures,  but firms during cooling. If an intact appearance is important, it’s good to let  grains and legumes cool down before handling them.  Of course the most important grain and legume foods are made from finely  ground flours or extracts. Mix water with ground grains or with starch extracted  from beans and the result is a dough or batter, which heat can turn into noodles or
flat breads or cakes. Aerate doughs or batters with the help of yeasts or bacteria or  chemical leaveners, and the result is raised breads and cakes. Doughs and batters  are special materials in their own right, and are described in detail in the next  chapter.  Turning Seeds into Meat Substitutes  Vegetarian cooks, particularly Buddhists in China and Japan, have long used  grains, beans, and nuts to make foods with the chewy texture and savory  flavor of meat. Protein extracts from wheat (gluten or   seitan,   p. 468) and  soybean ( yuba,   p. 494) can be manipulated to simulate meat-protein fibers,  and fermented to produce savory, meaty flavors. In seed mixtures, whole  grains lend chewiness, beans a softer background and some sweetness and  complexity of flavor, and nuts both richness and roastiness.  Seeds Concentrate Cooking Liquids   Because grains and beans are dry and soak  up water, they remove water from the liquid they’re cooked in, and therefore  effectively concentrate other materials in the liquid. In this way they create a sauce  for themselves. When rice or polenta is cooked in milk, for example, the liquid  between the grains becomes richer in both milk proteins and fat globules, and so  more like cream. When grains are cooked in a meat stock, the stock become more  concentrated in gelatin, and so comes to resemble a reduced stock or demiglace.  The Grains, or Cereals  Of the approximately 8,000 species in the grass family, only a handful play a  significant role in the human diet. Aside from bamboo and sugar cane, these are  the cereals. While their grains are very similar in structure and composition, the  differences have made for widely divergent culinary histories.  The major Eurasian cereals — wheat, barley, rye, and oats — originally grew wild in  extensive stands on the temperate high plains of the Near East. Groups of early  humans could harvest enough wheat and barley from these wild fields in a few  weeks to sustain themselves for a year. Some 12,000 to 14,000 years ago, the first
agriculturalists began to plant and tend wheat and barley seeds selected for their  size and the ease with which they could be harvested and used; and farmers  gradually spread these crops throughout western and central Asia, Europe, and  north Africa. Each cereal had its advantages. Barley was especially hardy, while rye  and oats were able to adapt to wet, cold climates, and wheat produced a uniquely  elastic paste that could be filled with tiny bubbles and baked into tender raised  breads. Around the same time, the inhabitants of tropical and semitropical Asia  domesticated rice, with its special ability to grow in wet, hot growing conditions.  Somewhat later in warm central and South America arose maize, or corn, whose  plants and kernels dwarf those of the other cereals.  Grain Structure and Composition  The edible portion of the cereal plant, commonly called the grain or kernel, is  technically a complete fruit whose ovary-derived layer is very thin and dry. Three of  the cereals — barley, oats, and rice — bear fruits that are covered by small, tough,  leaf-like structures that fuse to form the husk or hull. Bread and durum wheats, rye,  and maize bear naked fruits and don’t have to be husked before milling.  All the grains have the same basic structure. The fruit tissue consists of a layer of  epidermis and several thin inner layers, including the ovary wall; altogether, it’s  only a few cells thick. Just underneath the seed coat is the   aleurone layer,   only one  to four cells thick and yet containing oil, minerals, protein, vitamins, enzymes, and  flavor out of proportion to its size. The aleurone layer is the outer layer and only  living part of the   endosperm ; the rest is a mass of dead cells that stores most of the  carbohydrates and protein, and that takes up most of the grain’s volume. Abutting  onto the endosperm from one side is the   scutellum,   a single modified leaf that  absorbs, digests, and conducts food from the endosperm to the   embryo,   or “germ,”  which is at the base of the fruit, and which is also well endowed with oil, enzymes,  and flavor.  The endosperm (from the Greek: “within the seed”) is often the only part of the  grain consumed. It consists of storage cells that contain starch granules embedded  in a matrix of protein. This matrix is made up of normal cell proteins and  membrane materials, and sometimes of spherical bodies   of special storage  proteins   which,   squeezed   together   as   the   starch   granules   grow,   lose   their  individual identity and form a monolithic mass. There’s generally more starch and
less protein per cell near the center of the grain than there is near the surface. This  gradient means that the more grains are refined by milling and polishing, the less  nutritious they get.  The anatomy of a wheat kernel. It's a miniature but complete fruit, with a dry rather  than fleshy ovary wall. The large mass of endosperm cells stores food to nourish the  early growth of the embryo or “germ.”  The Composition of Grains  Grain composition varies a great deal; these are rough figures, assuming a  moisture content of about 10%. Unless otherwise noted, the grains are whole.  Grain   Protein   Carbohydrate   Oil  Wheat   14   67   2  Barley   12   73   2  Barley, pearled   10   78   1  Rye   15   70   3  Oats   17   66   7  Rice, white   7   80   0.5  Rice, brown   8   77   3  Rice, wild   15   75   1
Grain   Protein   Carbohydrate   Oil  Corn (maize)   10   68   5  Fonio   8   75   3  Millet   13   73   6  Sorghum   12   74   4  Teff   9   77   2  Triticale   13   72   2  Amaranth   18   57   8  Buckwheat   13   72   4  Quinoa   13   69   6  Milling and Refining  People began treating the grains to remove their tough protective layers in  prehistoric times. Milling breaks the grains into pieces, and refining sifts away the  bran and germ. The very different mechanical properties of endosperm, germ, and  bran make this separation possible: the first is easily fragmented, and the others  are oily and leathery respectively. The germ and the bran — which in practice  include the aleurone layer just underneath it — together account for most of the  fiber, oil, and B vitamins contained in the whole grain, as well as some 25% of its  protein. Yet these parts of the grain are usually removed entirely or in part from  rice and barley grains, and from cornmeal and wheat flours. Why this waste?  Refined grains are easier to cook and to chew, and more attractively light in color.  And in the case of flours, the high lipid concentrations in the germ and aleurone  layer shorten   the   shelf   life   of   whole-grain   flours   substantially. The   oils   are  susceptible to oxidation and develop rancid flavors (stale aroma, harsh taste) in a  matter of weeks. Today most refined cereals in industrial countries are fortified  with B vitamins and iron in order to compensate for the nutrients lost with the  bran.
Breakfast Cereals  Apart from breads and pastries, the most common form in which Americans  consume grain is probably the breakfast cereal. There are two basic types of  breakfast cereals: hot, which require cooking, and ready-to-eat, which are eaten as  is, often with some cold milk.  Hot Cereals   Hot cereals have been eaten since the dawn of civilization in the form  of gruels, porridges, and congees. Corn grits, oatmeal, and cream of wheat are  modern examples. Cooking the whole or milled cereal in excess of hot water  softens the cell walls, gelates the starch grains and leaches starch molecules out,  and produces a digestible, bland mush. The only significant improvement brought  by the machine age has been a reduction in cooking time, either by grinding the  cereal finely enough that it’s quickly cooked, or by partly precooking it.  Ready-to-Eat Cereals   Ready-to-eat cereals are the more common breakfast cereal  by far in the United States. Ironically, the industry that has come under fire for  giving children little more than empty calories, a sort of early-morning junk food,  began as a “pure” and “scientific” health food, an alternative to the destructive diet  of turn-of-the-century America. Its story involves a uniquely American mix of  eccentric health reformers, fringe religion, and commercial canniness.  In the middle third of the 19th century, a vegetarian craze arose in opposition to  the diet of salt beef and pork, hominy, condiments, and alkali-raised white bread  that was prevalent at the time. A pure, plain diet for America was the object, and  the issue was not only medical but moral. As Dr. John Harvey Kellogg put it  somewhat later in his   Plain Facts for Old and Young,   “A man that lives on pork, fine-  flour bread, rich pies and cakes, and condiments, drinks tea and coffee, and uses  tobacco, might as well try to fly as to be chaste in thought.” Kellogg and his brother  Will Keith Kellogg, C. W. Post, and others invented such virtuous preparations as  shredded wheat, wheat and corn flakes, and Grape Nuts. These precooked cereals  did offer a light, simple alternative to the substantial breakfasts of the day, became  widely popular, and quickly generated a large, inventive, and profitable industry.  Today there are several major varieties of ready-to-eat cereals:  •   Muesli is a simple mixture of thinly rolled grains, sugar, dried fruits, and nuts.  •   Flakes are made from whole grains (wheat) or grain fragments (corn) that are  flavored, steam-cooked, cooled, rolled into thin flakes, and toasted in a drum  oven.
•   Granola, a term coined by the Kelloggs 100 years ago, is now rolled oats  flavored with sweeteners (honey, malt, sugar) and spices, enriched with  vegetable oil, toasted and mixed with nuts and/or dried fruit.  •   Oven-puffed rice and corn are made by cooking rice grains or corn grits with  water and flavorings, partly drying and lightly rolling them, then toasting in  an   oven   that   may   reach   650ºF/340ºC,   when   the   remaining   moisture  evaporates quickly enough to expand the grain structure.  •   Puffed rice and wheat are made from whole grains, which are wetted and  enclosed in a pressure-cooker “gun” at a temperature of 500–800ºF/260–  430ºC. The   steam   pressure   reaches   14   atmospheres,   and   is   suddenly  released, expelling the grains. As the steam within the grains expands from  the pressure drop, it expands the grain structure, which then sets as it cools  down into a light, porous mass.  •   Baked cereals follow in the mold of the 19th century original, C. W. Post’s  Grape Nuts: dough of some sort is formed, baked, sometimes granulated  and rebaked.  •   Extruded cereals, usually small crunchy shapes, are made from doughs that  are forced at high pressure through small openings, much as dried pastas are  made. The pressure and friction generate high temperatures that cook the  dough as it’s shaped, and the pressure drop as the formed dough exits the  extruder can cause it to expand as well.  Grains are still the base for these cereals, but they may actually be outweighed by  sugar and other sweeteners. Sucrose is especially favored for its ability to give a  frosty or glassy surface to the crisp grain flakes and slow the penetration of milk  and resulting sogginess.  Wheat  Wheat was one of the first food plants to be cultivated by humans, and was the  most important cereal in the ancient Mediterranean civilizations. After a long  hiatus from the Middle Ages to the 19th century, when hardier but less versatile  cereals and potatoes were the principal staple foods, it regained its preeminence in  much of Europe. Wheat was brought to America early in the 17th century and had  reached the Great Plains by 1855. Compared to other temperate-zone cereals,  wheat is a demanding crop. It’s susceptible to disease in warm, humid regions and
does best in a cool climate, but it can’t be grown as far north as rye and oats.  Food Words:   Cereal, Wheat, Barley, Rye, Oat  Our word “cereal” comes from the Roman goddess of the fields, Ceres, whose  name came in turn from an Indo-European root,   ker,   that meant “to grow”; the  same root also led to “create,”   “increase,” and “crescent.”   Bhares   was the word  for “barley” and also gave us “barn”;   wrughyo   meant “rye.”   “Wheat” came from  the same root that gives us “white” ( kweit ), apparently because its flour was  light in color; and “oat” came from   oid,   “to swell.”  Ancient and Modern Wheats   A handful of different wheats have been grown  from prehistoric times to the present. Their evolution is fascinating and still  somewhat mysterious, and is summarized in the box on p. 466. The simplest wheat  and one of the first to be cultivated was   einkorn,   which had the standard genetic  endowment of most plants and animals: namely two sets of chromosomes (a  “diploid” species). Somewhat less than a million years ago, a chance mating of a  wild wheat with a wild goatgrass produced a wheat species with four sets of  chromosomes, and this “tetraploid” species gave us the two most important  wheats of the ancient Mediterranean world,   emmer   and   durum.   Then, just 8,000  years ago, another unusual mating between a tetraploid wheat species and a  goatgrass gave an offspring with six sets of chromosomes: and this offspring gave  us our modern   bread wheats.   The extra chromosomes are thought to contribute to  the agricultural and culinary diversity found in modern wheats, most importantly  the elasticity of the gluten proteins. Today 90% of the wheat grown in the world is  hexaploid bread wheat. Most of the remaining 10% is durum wheat, whose main  purpose is making pasta (p. 571). The other wheats are still cultivated on a small  scale.  Durum Wheat   Durum wheat,   T. turgidum durum,   is the most important of the  tetraploid wheats. It arose in the Near East and spread to the Mediterranean before  Roman times, when it was one of two major wheats. Emmer was better suited to  humid climates and had a starchy grain, while durum was better suited to semiarid  conditions and had a glassy grain. Both were used to make breads leavened and
unleavened, bulgur, couscous, injera, and other preparations. Southern and central  Italy is now the main producer in Europe; India, Turkey, Morocco, Algeria, and the  United States and Canada are large producers elsewhere.  World Grain Production  The leading figure for maize is misleading because a large fraction of the  maize harvest is used to feed animals and produce industrial chemicals. Some  wheat is also used for animal feed, while nearly all rice is eaten directly by  humans.  Grain  Whole Grain Production, 2002  Millions of Metric Tons  Maize   602  Rice   579  Wheat   568  Barley   132  Sorghum   55  Oats   28  Millets   26  Rye   21  Buckwheat   2  Source: Food and Agriculture Organization, United Nations  Einkorn Wheat   Einkorn wheat,   T. monococcum,   was rediscovered in the early 1970s  in the Vaucluse region of France and the southern Alps, where it was being grown  to make a local porridge. It was probably the first wheat to be cultivated, around  10,000 years ago. It grows best in cool conditions, tends to be rich in yellow  carotenoid pigments and is high in protein. However, where the proportions of  elastic glutenin and flowing gliadin (p. 521) are 1 to 1 in bread wheat, in einkorn  they’re 1 to 2. The result is a sticky, fluid gluten that’s unsuited to breadmaking.
The Wheat Family  Relationships in the wheat family are complicated and still the subject of  scholarly argument. Here is one plausible version of the family tree. Those  wheats whose grains are enclosed in adhering papery husks are noted as  “hulled”; all the rest are hullless and are therefore much easier to prepare for  cooking or milling. Wheats in common use today are highlighted in bold type.  Wild einkorn (diploid; hulled;  Triticum monococcum boeticum )   →   Cultivated einkorn (diploid; hulled;  T. monococcum monococcum )  A wild wheat,   Triticum urartu   + a goatgrass,   Aegilops speltoides  →  Triticum turgidum   (tetraploid):  Emmer (hulled;   T. turgidum dicoccum )  Durum   ( T. turgidum durum )  Khorasan ( T. turgidum turanicum )  Polish ( T. turgidum polonicum )  Persian ( T. turgidum carthlicum )  Triticum turgidum   + a goatgrass,   Aegilops tauschii  →  Triticum aestivum (hexaploid):  Common, bread wheat   ( T. aestivum aestivum )  Spelt (hulled;   T. aestivum spelta )  Club ( T. aestivum compactum )  Emmer Wheat or   Farro   Emmer wheat,   T. turgidum dicoccum,   was probably the  second wheat to be cultivated. It grew in warmer climates than einkorn, and  became the most important cultivated form from the Near East through northern
Africa and Europe until early Roman times, when it was superseded by durum and  bread wheats. But pockets of emmer cultivation survived in parts of Europe, and  emmer is now widely available under its Italian name,   farro.   In Tuscany whole farro  grains go with beans into a winter soup; the pre-soaked grains are also made into a  risotto-like dish called farrotto.  Kamut   Kamut is the registered trademark for an ancient relative of durum wheat, a  subspecies of   T. turgidum.   The modern production and commercialization of kamut  (Egyptian for “wheat”) began after World War II, when seeds said to have been  collected in Egypt were planted in Montana. It’s characterized by a large grain size  and a high protein content, though its gluten is better suited to pasta than to  raised breads.  Spelt   Spelt,   T. spelta   became known as   Dinkel   in southern Germany, where it has  been grown since 4000   BCE . It’s often confused with emmer (farro). Spelt is  remarkable for its high protein content, as much as 17%. It’s still used to make  breads and soups. Central Europeans make   Grünkern,   or “green kernel,” by gently  drying or roasting the green grain and milling it for use in soups and other  preparations.  Varieties of Bread and Pasta Wheats   Something on the order of 30,000 varieties  of wheat are known, and they’re classified into a few different types according to  planting schedule and endosperm composition. They’re mostly used to make  breads, pastries, and pastas, and are described in the next chapter.  Wheat Pigments   Most wheat varieties have a reddish-brown bran layer that owes  its color to various phenolic compounds and to browning enzymes (p. 269) that  assemble them into large colored aggregates. Less common are white wheats,  whose bran layer is cream-colored due to a much lower content of phenolic  compounds and browning enzymes. White wheats have a less astringent taste and  discolor less when some of the bran is included in the flour; they’re used to replace  ordinary wheats when an especially mild flavor or light color is desired.  The color of durum wheat, its coarse semolina flour, and dry pasta is due mainly to  the carotenoid xanthophyll lutein, which can be oxidized to a colorless form by  enzymes in the grain and oxygen. This maturation has traditionally been desired in  wheats (remember that the name comes from an ancient root meaning “white”),  but is not in durum. Some of the minor wheats are also rich in carotenoid  pigments.
Protein Content and Quality of Different Wheat Varieties  Gluten quality determines the suitability of a given wheat for particular  dishes. Both bread and pasta benefit from a strong, cohesive gluten. Elasticity  improves the gas-trapping ability and lightness of bread doughs, but  interferes with the rolling of pasta dough into thin sheets.  Wheat Variety  Protein Content,  % grain weight   Gluten Quality  Bread   10–15   Strong and elastic  Durum   15   Strong, not very elastic  Einkorn   16   Weak, sticky  Emmer (farro)   17   Moderately strong, not very elastic  Spelt, hard   16   Moderately strong, not very elastic  Spelt, soft   15   Strong, moderately elastic  Wheat Gluten  Gluten in Wheat Flour Doughs   Wheat has long been the West’s premier grain  primarily because its storage proteins have unique chemical properties. When flour  is mixed with water, the gluten proteins bond to each other and form an elastic  mass that can expand to accommodate gas bubbles produced by yeast. Without  wheat, then, we would not have raised breads, cakes, and pasta as we know them.  Gluten quantity   and   quality   vary   significantly   among   different   wheats,   and  determine the uses to which a given type is put.  Gluten as a Separate Ingredient   Because they’re both cohesive and insoluble in  water, the gluten proteins are easily separated from the rest of the flour: you  simply make a dough, then knead it in water. The starch and water-soluble  substances wash away, and tough, chewy gluten remains. Gluten as a unique food  ingredient was discovered by Chinese noodle makers around the 6th century, and  by the 11th was known as   mien chin,   or the “muscle of flour.” (The Japanese call it  seitan. ) When cooked, concentrated gluten does develop a chewy, slippery texture  like that of meats from animal muscle.   Mien chin   became a major ingredient in the
vegetarian cooking that developed in Buddhist monasteries; there are recipes  dating from the 11th century for imitation venison and jerky, and for fermented  gluten. Because gluten contains a high proportion of glutamic acid, fermentation  breaks it down into a condiment that was an early version of savory-tasting MSG  (p. 342). One of the simplest ways to prepare gluten is to pinch off small bits and  deep-fry them; they puff up into light chewy balls that readily absorb the flavor  from a sauce. Today gluten is widely available and used to make a variety of  vegetarian “meats.”  Notable Wheat Preparations   Whole grains of wheat, often called wheat berries,  are usually sold with their bran fully intact, and can take an hour or more to cook  unless presoaked. Farro is now available with part of its bran milled away — similar  to partly milled pigmented rice and wild rice — and cooks much more quickly,  while retaining the stronger flavor and integrity of separate grains provided by the  bran.  Wheat germ is sometimes added to baked goods or other foods; it is a good source  of protein (20% by weight), oil (10%), and fiber (13%). Wheat bran is mainly fiber,  with about 4% oil. Their oil content makes both bran and germ susceptible to  developing stale flavors. They’re best stored in the refrigerator.  Bulgur   Bulgur or burghul is an ancient preparation of wheat — usually durum —  that’s still popular in North Africa and the Middle East. It’s made by cooking whole  grains in water, drying them so that the interior becomes glassy and hard, then  moistening them to toughen the outer bran layer, and finally pounding or milling  to remove the bran and germ and leave the endosperm in coarse chunks. It’s the  wheat version of parboiled rice (p. 473). The result is a nutritious form of wheat that  keeps indefinitely and cooks relatively quickly. Coarse bulgur (to 3.5 mm across) is  used much as rice or couscous is, boiled or steamed to go with a moist dish or  made into a pilaf or a salad, while fine bulgur (0.5–2 mm) is made into falafel  (deep-fried balls of bulgur and fava-bean flour), and various pudding-like sweets.  Green, or Immature Wheat   Green wheat grains have also been enjoyed for their  sweetness and unusual flavor. The stalks are cut while the grains are still moist  inside, the grains charred over a small straw fire to weaken the husks and add  flavor, then eaten fresh or dried for keeping (Turkish   firig,   Arab   frikke ).
Barley  Barley,   Hordeum vulgare,   may have been the first cereal to be domesticated in the  grasslands of southwest Asia, where it grew alongside wheat. It has the advantage  of a relatively short growing season and a hardy nature; it’s grown from the Arctic  Circle to the tropical plains of northern India. It was the primary cereal in ancient  Babylon, Sumeria, Egypt, and the Mediterranean world, and was grown in the  Indus valley civilization of western India long before rice. According to Pliny, barley  was the special food of the gladiators, who were called   hordearii,   or “barley eaters”;  barley porridge, the original polenta, was made with   roasted flaxseed and  coriander. In the Middle Ages, and especially in northern Europe, barley and rye  were the staple foods of the peasantry, while wheat was reserved for the upper  classes. In the medieval Arab world, barley dough was fermented for months to  produce a salty condiment,   murri,   that food historian Charles Perry has discovered  tastes much like soy sauce.  Food Words: From Barley Water to   Orgeat, Horchata, Tisane  The European habit of drinking barley water has mostly faded away, but it  lives on in the names of several other beverages or beverage flavorings. The  Latin word for barley,   hordeum,   became the French   orge ;   orge mondé,  meaning hulled barley, became   orgemonde   and in the 16th century   orgeat.  Orgeat is still around, but it’s now an almond-flavored syrup.   Orgeat   also  became the Spanish word   horchata,   which gradually evolved from a barley  drink to a drink made with either rice or the chufa or tiger “nut” (p. 308). And  tisane,   the modern French term for an infusion of herbs or flowers? It comes  from the Latin   ptisana,   which meant both crushed cleaned barley or the drink  made therefrom, which was sometimes flavored with herbs.  Today, barley is a minor food in the West; half of production is fed to animals, and a  third is used in the form of malt. Elsewhere, barley is made into various staple  dishes, including the Tibetan roasted barley flour   tsampa,   often eaten simply  moistened with tea; it’s an important ingredient in the Japanese fermented soy  paste miso; and in Morocco (the largest per capita consumer) and other countries
of north Africa and western Asia it’s used in soups, porridges, and flat breads. In  Ethiopia there are white, black, and purple-grained barleys, some of which are  made into drinks. Water simmered with raw or roasted barley has been enjoyed for  two thousand years or more, from western Europe to Japan.  The barley grain is notable for containing significant quantities — about 5% each  of the grain weight — of two carbohydrates other than starch: the pentosans that  give rye flours their stickiness, and the glucans that give oats their gelatinous and  cholesterol-lowering qualities (pp. 470, 471). Both are found in the walls of  endosperm cells as well as in the bran, and together with barley’s water-insoluble  proteins they contribute to the distinctively springy texture of the cooked grain.  They also cause barley flour to absorb twice the water that wheat flour does.  Pearled Barley   There are hull-less barleys, but most food varieties have adherent  hulls that are removed as part of the milling process. Barley has more of its grain  removed than does rice, the other grain frequently prepared as a whole grain. This  is partly because barley bran is brittle and doesn’t come off in large flakes, so it  can’t be removed during normal milling; and partly because processors eliminate  the deep crease in the barley grain to give it a more uniform appearance. The  process of “pearling” in a stone mill removes the hull and then portions of the bran.  “Pot barley” has lost 7–15% of the grain, but retains the germ and some of the  bran, and so more nutrients and flavor. Fine pearled barley has lost the bran, germ,  and aleurone and subaleurone layers, a loss of about 33% of the grain’s initial  weight.  Barley Malt   The most important form in which we consume barley is   malt,   a major  ingredient in beers and some distilled liquors, and a minor ingredient in many  baked goods. Malt is a powder or syrup made from barley grains that are  moistened and allowed to germinate, and that become sweet with sugars. Its  production and qualities are described below (pp. 679, 743).  Rye  Rye apparently arose in southwest Asia, migrated with domesticated wheat and  barley as a weed in the crops of early farmers, reached the coast of the Baltic Sea  around 2000   BCE , grew better than the other cereals in the typically poor, acid soil  and cool, moist climate, and was domesticated around 1000   BCE . It’s exceptionally  hardy, and is grown as far north as the Arctic Circle and as high as 12,000
feet/4,000 meters. Up through the last century it was the predominant bread grain  for the poor of northern Europe, and even today the taste for rye persists,  especially in Scandinavia and eastern Europe. Poland, Germany, and Russia are the  leading producers. In Germany, wheat production exceeded rye for the first time  only in 1957.  Rye and LSD  In addition to its role as a food, rye has also had an indirect influence on  modern medicine and recreational pharmacology. The cool, moist climate in  which rye does well is also favorable for the growth of the   ergot   fungus  ( Claviceps purpurea ). From the 11th to the 16th centuries, ergot  contamination of rye flour was responsible for frequent epidemics of what  was called Holy Fire or Saint Anthony’s Fire, a disease with two sets of  symptoms: progressive gangrene, in which extremities turned black, shrank,  and dropped off; and mental derangement. Occasional outbreaks of ergot  poisoning from contaminated flour continued well into the 20th century.  Early in the 20th century, chemists isolated from ergot a handful of alkaloids  with very different effects: one stimulates the uterine muscle; some are  hallucinogens; and some constrict the blood vessels, an action that can cause  gangrene, but that also has useful medical applications. All these alkaloids  have a basic component in common called lysergic acid. In 1943 the Swiss  scientist Albert Hofman discovered the particular variant that would come to  such prominence in the 1960s: the hallucinogen lysergic acid diethylamide, or  LSD.  Rye has unusual carbohydrates and proteins, and as a result produces a distinctive  kind of bread. It’s described in the next chapter (p. 545).  Rye Carbohydrates   Rye contains a large quantity, up to 7% of its weight, of  carbohydrates called   pentosans   (an old term; the new one is   arabinoxylans ). These  are medium-sized aggregates of sugars that have the very useful property of  absorbing   large   amounts   of   water   and   producing   a   thick,   viscous,   sticky  consistency. Thanks to its pentosans, rye flour absorbs eight times its weight in
water,   while   wheat   flour   absorbs   two.   Unlike   starch,   the   pentosans   don’t  retrograde and harden after being cooked and cooled. So they provide a soft,  moist texture that helps gives rye breads a shelf life of weeks. Rye pentosans also  help control appetite; the dried carbohydrates in rye crisps swell in the stomach,  thus giving the sensation of fullness, and they are slowly and only partly digested.  Oats  The world produces more oats than rye today, but 95% of the crop is fed to  animals. Oats are the grains of   Avena sativa,   a grass that probably originated in  south-west Asia and gradually came under cultivation as a companion of wheat  and barley. In Greek and Roman times it was considered a weed or a diseased form  of wheat. By 1600 it had become an important crop in northern Europe, in whose  wet climate it does best; oats require more moisture than any other cereal but rice.  Other countries, however, continued to disdain it. Samuel Johnson’s   Dictionary  (London, 1755) gives this definition for oats: “A grain, which in England is generally  given to horses, but in Scotland supports the people.”  Today the United Kingdom and the United States are the largest consumers of  food oats. U.S. consumption was boosted in the late 19th century by Ferdinand  Schumacher, a German immigrant who developed quick-cooking rolled oats for  breakfast, and Henry Crowell, who was the first to turn a cereal from a commodity  into a retail brand by packaging oats neatly with cooking instructions, labeling it  “Pure,” and naming it “Quaker Oats.” Oats are now a mainstay in ready-to-eat  granolas, mueslis, and manufactured breakfast cereals.  There are several reasons for the relatively minor status of oats. Like barley, oats  have no gluten-producing proteins, which means that they can’t be made into  light raised breads. The kernel has adherent husks that make it difficult to process.  Oats contain from two to five times the fat that wheat does, mainly in the bran and  endosperm rather than the germ, and also carry large amounts of a fat-digesting  enzyme. The combination means that oats have a tendency to become rancid.  They require a heat treatment that inactivates the enzyme in order to prevent  rapid deterioration during storage.  On the other hand, oats do have several virtues. They’re rich in indigestible  carbohydrates called beta-glucans, which absorb and hold water, give hot oatmeal  its smooth, thick consistency, have a tenderizing, moistening effect in baked
goods, and help lower our blood cholesterol levels. The glucans are found mainly  in the outer layers of the endosperm under the aleurone layer, and so are  especially concentrated in oat bran. Oats also contain a number of phenolic  compounds that have antioxidant activity.  Oat Processing   Oats are generally used as whole grains, also called groats,  because they’re much softer than wheat or corn and don’t break cleanly into  endosperm,   germ,   and   bran. The   first   stage   in   their   processing   is   a   low-  temperature “roasting,” which gives the grain much of its characteristic flavor and  inactivates the fat-splitting enzyme. (This step also denatures the storage proteins  and makes them less soluble, giving the grain greater integrity during cooking.)  The whole groats are then processed into various shapes, all of which have the  same nutritional value. Steel-cut oats are simply whole groats cut into two to four  pieces for faster cooking. Rolled oats are whole kernels that are steamed to make  them soft and malleable, then pressed between rollers to make them thin and  quick to reabsorb water during cooking or simple soaking (as for muesli). The  thinner the oats are rolled, the faster they rehydrate: regular oats are about 0.8 mm  thick, “quick-cooking” oats are around 0.4 mm, and “instant” even thinner.  Rice  Rice is the principal food for about half of the world’s population, and in such  countries as Bangladesh and Cambodia provides nearly three-quarters of the daily  energy intake.   Oryza sativa   is a native of the tropical and semitropical Indian  subcontinent,   northern   Indochina,   and   southern   China,   and   was   probably  domesticated in several places independently, the short-grain types around 7000  BCE   in the Yangtze River valley of south-central China, and long-grain types in  Southeast Asia somewhat later. A sister species with a distinctive flavor and red  bran,   Oryza glaberrima,   has been grown in west Africa for at least 1,500 years.  Rice found its way from Asia to Europe via Persia, where the Arabs learned to grow  and cook it. The Moors first grew large quantities in Spain in the 8th century, then  somewhat later in Sicily. The valley of the Po River and the Lombardy plain in  northern Italy, the home of risotto, first produced rice in the 15th century. The  Spanish and Portuguese introduced rice throughout the Americas in the 16th and  17th centuries. South Carolina was the location of the first commercial American  planting in 1685, where the rice-growing expertise of African slaves was important;
today most U.S. rice comes from Arkansas and the lower Mississippi region, Texas,  and California.  Kinds of Rice   There are thought to be more than 100,000 distinct varieties of rice  throughout the world. They all fall into one of two traditionally recognized  subspecies of   Oryza sativa. Indica   rices are generally grown in lowland tropics and  subtropics, accumulate a large amount of amylose starch, and produce a long, firm  grain.   Japonica   rices, with upland varieties that do well both in the tropics  (Indonesian and Filipino types sometimes known as   javanicas ) and in temperate  climates (Japan, Korea, Italy, and California), accumulate substantially less amylose  starch than the   indicas,   and produce a shorter, stickier grain. There are also  varieties that are intermediate between   indica   and   japonica.   Generally, the higher  the amylose content in a rice variety, the more organized and stable the starch  granules, and so the more water, heat, and time it takes to cook the grains.  Most rice is milled to remove the bran and most of the germ, and then “polished”  with fine wire brushes to grind away the aleurone layer and its oil and enzymes.  The result is a very stable refined grain that keeps well for months.  Common categories of rice include the following:  •   Long-grain   rice has an elongated shape, its length four to five times its width.  Thanks to its relatively high proportion of amylose (22%), it tends to require  the largest proportion of water to rice (1.7 to 1 by weight, 1.4 to 1 by  volume), and to produce separate springy grains that become firm as they  cool, and distinctly hard if chilled. Most Chinese and Indian rices are long-  grain   indicas,   as is most of the rice sold in the United States.  •   Medium-grain   rice is two to three times longer than it is wide, contains less  amylose (15–17%) than long-grain rice and requires less water, and develops  tender grains that cling to each other. Italian risotto rices and Spanish paella  rices are medium-grain   japonicas.  •   Short-grain   rice is only slightly longer than it is wide, and otherwise similar to  medium-grain rice. Short-and medium-grain   japonicas   are the preferred  types in north China, Japan, and Korea. They’re ideal for sushi because they  cling together in small masses and remain tender even when served at room  temperature.  •   Sticky   rice, also called waxy, glutinous, or sweet rice, is a short-grain type  whose starch is practically all amylopectin. It requires the least water (1 to 1
by weight, 0.8 to 1 by volume) and becomes very clingy and readily  disintegrates when cooked (it’s often soaked and then steamed, not boiled).  Despite its names, it contains no gluten and isn’t sweet, though it’s often  used to make sweet dishes in Asia. It’s the standard rice in Laos and northern  Thailand.  •   Aromatic   rices are a distinctive group of mainly long-and medium-grain  varieties   that   accumulate   unusually   high   concentrations   of   volatile  compounds. Indian and Pakistani   basmati   (Urdu for “fragrant,” accent on the  first syllable), Thai jasmine (an unusual long-grain but low-amylose type),  and U.S. Della are well-known aromatic rices.  •   Pigmented   rices have bran layers that are rich in anthocyanin pigments. Red  and purple-black colors are the most common. The bran may be left intact,  or partly milled away so that only traces of color are left.  Brown Rice   Brown rice is unmilled, its bran, germ, and aleurone layers intact. Any  kind of rice, whether long-grain, short-grain, or aromatic, may be sold in its brown  form. It takes two to three times longer to cook than the milled version of the same  variety, and has a chewy texture and a rich aroma, often described as nutty. Thanks  to the oil in its bran and germ, it’s more susceptible to staling than polished rice,  and is best stored in the refrigerator.  Parboiled or Converted Rice   For more than 2,000 years, rice producers in India and  Pakistan have parboiled nonaromatic varieties before they remove the hull and  mill them to white rice. They steep the freshly harvested grain in water, boil or  steam it, and then dry it again before hulling and milling. This precooking brings  several advantages. It improves the nutritional quality of the milled grain by  causing vitamins in the bran and germ to diffuse into the endosperm, and causing  the aleurone layer to adhere to the grain. Precooking the starch also hardens the  grain and makes its surface less sticky, so when cooked again, parboiled rice  produces separate firm intact grains. Parboiled rice also has a distinctive nutty  flavor; the soaking activates enzymes that generate sugars and amino acids that  then participate in browning reactions during drying; and partial breakdown of  lignin in the attached hull provides vanillin and related compounds. Parboiled rice  takes longer to cook than ordinary white rice, a third to half again the time, and its  texture is so firm that it can seem coarse.
Different forms of rice. Brown rice includes the outer fruit and seed coats that make up  the bran, and the embryo and oil-and enzyme-rich aleurone layer. Polished rice is the  central mass of endosperm cells, freed from all other parts of the grain; it’s mainly  starch and protein. Wild rice is the whole grain of a North American grass; it is heated  to dry it out and develop flavor, and this processing gives its endosperm a distinctive  glassy appearance.  Quick-Cooking Rice   Quick-cooking rice is manufactured by cooking white, brown,  or parboiled rice, thus disrupting its cell walls and gelating its starch, then fissuring  the grain in order to speed the infiltration of hot water when the consumer cooks  it, and finally drying it. The fissuring may be accomplished with dry heat, rolling,  microwave treatments, or freeze-drying.  Rice Flavor   The flavor of rice depends on the variety and the degree to which it is  milled. The outer portions of the rice grain contain more free amino acids, sugars,  and minerals, and proportionally less starch. The more a rice kernel is milled, and  so the more of its surface is removed, the less flavor and the higher proportion of  starch it contains.  The aroma of standard white rices has green, mushroomy, cucumber-like, and  “fatty” components (from 6, 8, 9, and 10-carbon aldehydes), as well as a slight  popcorn note and floral, corn-like, hay-like, and animal qualities. Brown rices  contain these and also small amounts of vanillin and maple-sugar-like sotolon.  Aromatic   rices   are   especially   rich   in   the   popcorn-like   aromatic   component  (acetylpyrroline), which is also an important element in screwpine leaves (p. 411),  and cooked popcorn and bread crust. Because it is volatile and not regenerated  during   cooking,   the   popcorn   aromatic   escapes   during   cooking,   and   its
concentration declines. This is one reason for pre-soaking aromatic rices; this step  shortens the cooking and minimizes aroma loss.  Cooking with Rice  Many Traditional Methods   The cooking of rice is a matter of introducing moisture  throughout the grains and heating them enough to gelate and soften the starch  granules. Indian cooks boil the rice in an excess of water that’s poured off when the  rice is done, so the grains end up intact and separate. Chinese and Japanese cooks  boil rice with just enough water to moisten and cook it through in a closed pot,  which produces a mass of grains that cling together and are easily eaten with  chopsticks. Where rice has always been an everyday staff of life, through much of  East Asia, it’s usually prepared simply in water, and judged by the intactness of its  grains and their whiteness, gloss, tenderness, and flavor. Where rice was more  unusual and even a luxury, in central Asia, the Middle East, and the Mediterranean,  it’s often enriched with broths, oils, butter, and other ingredients to make such  dishes as pilafs, risottos, and paellas. Iranians, perhaps the most sophisticated rice  cooks, make   polo   by partly boiling long-grain rice in excess water, layering it with a  variety of cooked meats, vegetables, dried fruits, and nuts, then gently steaming to  finish the cooking, and managing the heat so that a brown crust of rice, the prized  tahdig,   forms at the bottom.  Rinsing and Soaking   An initial rinsing of the dry rice removes surface starch and  thus a source of added stickiness. Some rices, notably basmatis and Japanese  varieties, are either soaked in water or allowed to rest for 20–30 minutes after  washing; they thus absorb some water, which will speed the subsequent cooking.  Brown and wild rices can be treated similarly.  After Cooking: Resting, Reheating   Once cooked, rice benefits from a resting  period to allow the grains to cool down somewhat and become firmer, so that they  aren’t as easily broken when scooped from the pot and served. Leftover rice is  often hard due to the retrogradation of the starch, which is cured by heating it up  to   the   gelation   temperature   again. Rice   is   easily   softened   by   reheating   to  160ºF/70ºC or above, either with a little added water in a pot or in the microwave  oven, or fried to make fried rice, rice cakes, or croquettes.
Risotto: Turning Rice into Its Own Sauce  The risotto of Italy is made with medium-grain varieties that are fairly large  and can tolerate the unique cooking method, which abrades and removes  starch from the rice surface so that it can thicken the cooking liquid to a  creamy consistency.  To make risotto, the rice is cooked through by adding a small amount of hot  cooking liquid at a time and stirring the rice until the liquid is absorbed, then  repeating until the rice is soft but still has a kernel of chewiness at the center.  This time-consuming technique subjects the rice grains to constant friction,  and rubs softened endosperm from the surface so that it can become  dissolved in the liquid phase (stirring only at the end of cooking breaks the  softened grains apart rather than removing the surface layer). In addition, the  cooking of small amounts of liquid in an open pan causes much of the  moisture to evaporate, which means that more of the cooking liquid must be  used, and thus that more of the cooking liquid’s flavor becomes concentrated  in the dish.  Restaurant cooks prepare risotto to order by cooking the rice well ahead of  time the traditional way until it’s just short of done, then refrigerating it. This  allows some of the cooked starch in the rice to firm (p. 458), giving the grain  more resilience than it would have if cooked fully and simply rewarmed. Then  just before serving, the chilled rice is reheated and finished with hot broth  and enrichments.  Keeping Rice Safe   Cooked rice turns out to be a potential source of food  poisoning. Raw rice almost always carries dormant spores of the bacterium   Bacillus  cereus,   which produces powerful gastrointestinal toxins. The spores can tolerate  high temperatures, and some survive cooking. If cooked rice is left for a few hours  at   room   temperature,   the   spores   germinate,   bacteria   multiply,   and   toxins  accumulate. Ordinary cooked rice should therefore be served promptly, and  leftovers refrigerated to prevent bacterial growth. The rice in Japanese sushi is  served at room temperature, but the surface of its cooked grains are coated with a  flavorful and antimicrobial mixture of rice vinegar and sugar. Rice salads should be  similarly acidified with vinegar, lemon or lime juice.
Some Other Rice Preparations and Products   Cultures across the world have  found many different inventive uses for rice. Here is a brief sampling.  Rice Flour   Rice flour is notable for being around 90% starch, and for having the  smallest starch granules of the major cereals, a half to a quarter the size of wheat  starch granules. When used to thicken sauces or fillings, it provides an especially  fine texture. And thanks to its low protein content, the dry flour absorbs relatively  little water. This means that when it’s used to make a frying batter for Japanese  tempura, rice flour gives a thin consistency with relatively little water, and so the  batter readily fries to a crisp, dry texture.  Because rice flour contains no elastic gluten proteins, it can’t be used to make  raised breads. But the same lack of gluten makes rice flour a useful ingredient for  people with gluten intolerance. Bakers make a reasonable approximation of raised  bread by supplementing rice flour with xanthan or guar gum or other long-chain  carbohydrates, which help bind the dough together and retain the gas bubbles  produced by yeasts or chemical leavenings.  Rice Powder   Rice powder is a condiment made in Vietnam and Thailand by  roasting the grains, then grinding them; it’s sprinkled on a variety of dishes just  before eating.  Rice Noodles and Rice Paper   Despite rice’s lack of gluten, noodles and thin sheets  can be made from rice-flour doughs (p. 579). Rice paper is used as a wrapper to  enclose   meat   and   vegetable   preparations,   and   can   be   eaten   either   simply  moistened or fried.  Mochi   Mochi is the Japanese name for a chewy, almost elastic preparation of sticky  rice that may be formed into balls or into thin sheets for wrapping around a filling  of some kind. It’s made by steaming sticky rice, then pounding it to a paste, or by  making a dough from sticky rice flour and kneading it for 30 minutes. The  pounding or kneading organizes the bushy amylopectin starch molecules into an  intermeshed mass that resists changes in its structure.  Lao Chao   Lao chao is a Chinese fermented rice made from sticky rice. The rice is  steamed, cooled, made into small cakes with a starter that includes the mold  Aspergillus oryzae   (p. 755) and yeasts, and held at room temperature for two to  three days until it becomes soft, sweet, and tart, with a fruity and alcoholic aroma.  Wild Rice   Wild rice is not a species of the true tropical rice genus   Oryza.   It’s a
distant relative, a cool-climate water grass that produces unusually long grains, to  three-quarters of an inch (2 cm), with a dark seedcoat and a complex, distinctive  flavor.   Zizania palustris   is a native of the upper midwestern Great Lakes region of  North America, where it grows in shallow lakes and marshes and was gathered in  canoes by the Ojibway and other native peoples. It’s the only cereal from North  America to have become important as a human food. Wild rice is unusual among  the cereals for containing double the usual amount of moisture at maturity,  around 40% of the kernel weight. It thus requires more elaborate processing than  true rice in order to be stored. It’s first matured in moist piles for a week or two,  during which immature grains continue to ripen and microbes grow on the grain  surfaces, generating flavor and weakening the husks. Then it is parched over a fire  to dry the grain, flavor it, and make the husk brittle; and finally it’s threshed to  remove the husk.  Texture and Flavor   Wild rice has a firm, chewy texture thanks to its intact bran  layer and the parching process, which gelates and then anneals the starch much as  parboiling does for true rice. It takes longer to cook than most grains, sometimes  an hour or more, because its starch has been precooked into a hard, glassy mass,  and because its bran layers are impregnated with cutins and waxes (p. 262) to  resist the absorption of water (in nature, the grains fall into the water and lie  dormant for months or even years before germinating). The dark pigmentation  may also contribute; it is partly green-black chlorophyll derivatives and partly black  phenolic complexes generated by browning enzymes. Producers often slightly  abrade the grains to improve their water absorption and shorten cooking time.  Cooks can also pre-soak the grains for hours in warm water.  The flavor of the raw grain has earthy and green, flowery, tea-like notes. Curing  amplifies the tea notes (from pyridines) but may add an undesirable mustiness;  parching generates browning reactions and a toasted, nutty character (from  pyrazines). Different producers use different methods for curing (none, brief,  extended) and parching (low or high temperatures, open fires or indirectly heated  metal drums), so the flavor of wild rice varies greatly.  Domesticated   Wild   Rice   Relatively   little   wild   rice   is   still   gathered   from  uncultivated, naturally occurring stands. Today most is grown in artificially flooded  paddies, and harvested mechanically after the fields are drained. Cultivated wild  rice therefore has more consistently mature, dark seedcoats than the gathered  grain. To taste truly wild rice from its native region and savor the differences
among small producers, it’s necessary to read labels carefully.  Maize, or Corn  Maize, known in the United States as “corn” and among biologists as   Zea mays,   was  domesticated in Mexico some 7,000 to 10,000 years ago from a large grass called  teosinte ( Zea mexicana ), which grows in open woodlands. Unlike the Old World  cereals and the legumes, which human selection altered in relatively minor ways,  corn is the result of several drastic changes in the structure of teosinte that  concentrated pollen production at the top of the plant and female flower  production — and cob and kernel production — along the main stalk. The large  size of both plant and fruit made corn agriculture relatively easy, and corn quickly  became the basic food plant of many other early American cultures. The Incas of  Peru,   the   Mayas   and   Aztecs   of   Mexico,   the   cliff   dwellers   of   the   American  Southwest, Mississippi mound builders, and many seminomadic cultures in North  and South America depended on corn as a dietary staple. Columbus brought corn  back with him to Europe, and within a generation it was being grown throughout  southern Europe.  Food Words:   Corn   and   Maize  The grain that Americans call “corn” was originally known in English as “maize”  or “Indian corn.”   “Maize” comes from the Taino name used in the West Indies,  and is the source of the Spanish, Italian, and French names. The word   corn   is a  generic term that comes from the same root as   kernel   and   grain   and has the  same broad meaning; so “corned” beef is beef cured with grains of salt. “Corn”  is also used in different parts of Britain as shorthand for the most important  grain of the region. Only in the United States did it come to refer exclusively to  maize.  Corn is now the third largest human food crop in the world after wheat and rice,  and is the primary nourishment for millions of people in Latin America, Asia, and  Africa. In Europe and the United States, where more corn is fed to livestock than to  people, it’s appreciated for its unique flavor, for the texture and substance it
contributes to a variety of boiled, baked and fried foods, and as a snack food. Corn  also provides mash for making whiskey, corn starch for thickening sauces and  fillings,   corn   syrup   for   flavoring   and   lending   viscosity   to   various   sweet  preparations, and corn oil. Different parts of the plant are also turned into many  industrial products.  Kinds and Colors of Corn   There are five general kinds of corn, each characterized  by a different endosperm composition. It appears that a high-protein popcorn  type was the first corn to be cultivated, but all five were known to native  Americans long before the coming of Europeans.  •   Popcorn   and   flint corn   have a relatively large amount of storage protein that  surrounds granules of high-amy-lose starch.  •   Dent corn,   the variety most commonly grown for animal feed and for milled  food ingredients (grits, meals, flours), has a localized deposit of low-amylose,  “waxy” starch at the crown of the kernel, which produces a depression, or  dent, in the dried kernel.  •   Flour corns,   including the standard varieties of blue corn, are soft and easily  ground because their endosperm is a discontinuous and weak combination  of relatively little protein, mostly waxy starch, and air pockets. What we call  Indian corn today are flour and flint varieties with variegated kernels.  •   Sweet corn,   a popular vegetable in the United States when immature, stores  more sugar than starch, and therefore has translucent kernels and loose,  wrinkled skins (starch grains reflect light and plump out the kernels in the  other types). Most corn-producing countries also eat immature corn, but use  the other general-purpose corn types. The native Americans who first  developed it apparently enjoyed sweet corn for its full flavor when parched.  The different kinds of corn also come in various colors, some of which were  originally selected by native Americans for ceremonial use. The interior is usually  either unpigmented and white, or yellow with nutritionally valuable fat-soluble  carotenes and xanthophylls (beta carotene, lutein, zeaxanthin). Blue, purple, and  red kernels carry water-soluble anthocyanins in their aleurone layer, the nutrient-  rich cell layer just under the hull.
Types of corn. Left to right: Kernels of pop, dent, and sweet corn. Its abundant hard  endosperm helps popcorn contain the steam pressure that eventually explodes it.  Alkaline Treatment: Several Benefits   Corn is unusual among the grains for its  large size, and for the thickness and toughness of its outer pericarp, or hull. Early  corn eaters developed a special pretreatment to ease the removal of the hull,  which is called   nixtamalization   (from an Aztec word): they cooked the kernels in  water made alkaline with a variety of substances. The Mayas and Aztecs used ashes  or lime; North American tribes, ashes and naturally occurring sodium carbonate  deposits; and a contemporary Mayan group burns mussel shells for the same  purpose. One of the major glue-like components of plant cells walls, hemicellulose,  is especially soluble in alkaline conditions. Nixtamalization softens the hull and  partly detaches it from the rest of the kernel so that it can be rubbed off and  washed away. It also helps transform the kernels into a cohesive dough for making  tortillas and other preparations (see below), and it releases much of their bound  niacin so that we can absorb and benefit from it.  Corn Flavor   Corn has a distinctive flavor unlike that of any other grain. Popcorn  and other dry corn products toasted at a high temperature develop a number of  characteristic carbon-ring compounds, including one that they share with basmati  rice (acetylpyrroline). Alkaline processing gives rise to yet another set of distinctive  aroma molecules, including one that is a breakdown product of the amino acid  tryptophan, and a close chemical and aromatic relative of a characteristic note in  concord grapes and wood strawberries (aminoacetophenone, related to the fruits’  methyl anthranilate). Masa can also have violet-like and spicy notes (from ionone  and vinylguaiacol).
Mud-Fermented Corn  While exploring just east of Lake Huron around 1616, Samuel de Champlain  observed what might be called a “fermenting” technique practiced by the  Huron Indians. Here is a challenge for the anthropologist: is there a nutritional  basis for this recipe, did it just involve the microbial conversion of starch to  sugar, or is it the Huron equivalent of the “noble rot?”  They have another way of eating Indian corn, to prepare which they take it in  the ear and put it in water under the mud, leaving it two or three months in  that state, until they judge that it is putrid; then they take it out and boil it  with meat or fish and then eat it. They also roast it, and it is better this way  than boiled, but I assure you that nothing smells so bad as this corn when it  comes out of the water all covered with mud; yet the women and children  take it and suck it like sugar cane, there being nothing they like better, as they  plainly show.  Whole-grain Corns: Hominy, Corn Nuts   Common corn ingredients and foods can  be divided into two general groups: those based on the whole grain, and those  based on ground grain. There’s also a basic division between dry, untreated  materials and “wet-processed” alkaline-treated materials.  Whole-grain versions of corn are relatively few, with popcorn by far the most  common. Hominy consists of whole corn kernels, preferably white, cooked for 20–  40 minutes in a solution of lime or lye, then washed of their hulls and excess  alkaline solution. Hominy is used in soups (pozole), stews, and side dishes, and has  a dense, chewy consistency. Corn Nuts are a familiar snack food made from the  largest kernels known, the Cuzco gigante variety from Peru. The kernels are treated  with alkali to remove the hulls, soaked for some hours in warm water, fried to  develop color, flavor, and a crunchy texture, then flavored.  Popcorn   It appears from archaeological remains in Mexico that popping in the  embers of a fire may have been the first method for cooking corn. Early explorers  described popped corn among the Aztecs, Incas, and North American tribes. In the  19th century, Americans served popcorn as a breakfast cereal, made it into  porridges, puddings, and cakes, added it to soups, salads, and main dishes, and
mixed it with molasses to make an ancestor of the sweet popcorn ball and Cracker  Jack. Popcorn was a popular finger food in the United States in the 1880s, then  became associated with movie theatres, and later with watching television in the  home. In the 21st century, most of the popcorn sold in supermarkets is packaged  for microwave cooking.  Popcorn Blossoms  Leave it to Henry David Thoreau to see popcorn with fresh eyes. In midwinter  of 1842 he wrote in his journal:  I have been popping corn to-night, which is only a more rapid  blossoming of the seed under a greater than July heat. The popped  corn is a perfect winter flower, hinting of anemones and houstonias….  By my warm hearth sprang these cerealious blossoms; here was the  bank where they grew.  How Popcorn Pops   Some flint and dent varieties of corn will explode and form a  crisp puff, but expand far less than true popping varieties, which are generally  smaller and contain a greater proportion of hard translucent endosperm. Thanks to  a denser arrangement of cellulose fibers, the popcorn hull (pericarp) conducts heat  several times faster than the hull of ordinary corn; and thanks to both its density  and greater thickness, it is several times stronger: so the hull transmits heat more  rapidly to the endosperm, and can withstand higher steam pressure from within  before giving way.  As the temperature inside the corn kernel reaches and passes the boiling point, the  protein matrix and starch granules soften, and moisture in the granules turns into  steam. The steam softens the starch even more, and the many thousands of little  steam pockets exert a growing pressure against the hull. The softening of starch  and protein continues until the internal pressure approaches seven times the  external pressure of the atmosphere, at which point the hull breaks open. The  sudden pressure drop inside the kernel causes the pockets of steam to expand,  and with them expands the soft protein-starch mixture, which puffs up and then  stiffens as it cools off, becoming light and crisp. (If the popping is done in a tightly
covered pan that offers no escape for the water vapor, the endosperm will retain it  and be tough and chewy; the pan lid should be left slightly ajar.)  Popcorn pops best at a temperature around 380ºF/190ºC, and can be popped in  hot oil, in hot air poppers, and in the microwave oven. Different hybrids pop best  with different methods. Microwave popcorn bags develop the necessary high  temperatures by means of a thin layer of microwave-reflecting mylar.  Dry-milled Corn Foods: Grits, Cornmeal, Corn Flour   Most corn is prepared and  eaten in ground form, and dry-milled products are ground directly from the stored  grain, usually yellow dent corn, without any pretreatment. These days they’re  generally refined to exclude the hull and germ, an innovation that dates from  around 1900 and that made large-scale milling practical. The rarer whole-grain  corn meal and flour, sometimes ground between stone wheels, are richer in fiber,  flavor, and nutrients, but also stale rapidly thanks to the oils and related substances  in the germ, which become oxidized on contact with air.  Grits   are relatively coarse corn endosperm particles between 0.6 and 1.2 mm  across. They’re used to manufacture breakfast cereals, snacks, and beer, and are  cooked into a kind of porridge that’s especially beloved in the American South.  Grits were once made from alkaline-treated hominy, but this is now rare.  Cornmeal   is finer than grits, with particles down to 0.2 mm across, absorbs water  and cooks faster than grits, and provides a subtler graininess. It’s used to make  unleavened mush, polenta, and johnnycakes as well as corn breads, muffins, and  other baked and fried foods that include some wheat flour and leavening for  lightness.  Polenta Lore  Polenta, the Italian version of corn meal mush (originally made with barley),  has become a popular dish in the United States, and is the subject of much  lore. Some cooks make it quickly in the microwave oven, while traditionalists  insist on the necessity of slow cooking and constant stirring for an hour or  more. Long cooking at the stove does do one useful thing: it develops the  corn flavor by the constant application of higher-than-boiling heat to the pot  bottom (hence the need to stir to prevent burning) and the exposure to air
and drying that takes place at the surface. Busy cooks can develop just as  much flavor with less labor by partly covering the pot of just-thickened  polenta, putting it into a low oven (250ºF/130ºC), which heats the bottom and  sides in a controlled and even way, and stirring only occasionally.  Corn flour   is the finest-ground form of corn, with particles smaller than 0.2 mm,  and is usually mixed with other ingredients to provide flavor in various baked and  fried foods.  Wet-milled Corn: Masa, Tortillas, Tamales, Chips   Tortillas, tamales, and corn  chips are made from corn grains that are milled when wet, after they have  undergone the preliminary cooking step called nixtamalization (p. 478). The corn is  first cooked in a solution (0.8–5%) of calcium hydroxide, or lime, for a few minutes  to an hour, then is left to steep and slowly cool for 8 to 16 hours. During the  steeping, the alkalinity softens the hull and cell walls throughout, causes the  storage proteins to bond to each other, and breaks apart some of the corn oil into  excellent emulsifiers (monoand diglycerides). After steeping, the soaking solution  and softened hulls are washed away, and the kernels, including the germ, are then  stone ground to produce the dough-like material called   masa.   Stone grinding cuts  the kernels, mashes them, and kneads the mass, mixing together starch, protein,  oils, emulsifiers, and cell wall materials, and the lime’s molecule-bridging calcium.  With further kneading, this combination develops into a cohesive, plastic dough.  The convenience form of masa is masa harina, a flour made by flash-drying freshly  made masa into small particles. Because it’s made with less water than normal  masa and then is dried, masa harina has less masa aroma and an added browned,  toasty aroma, and produces a softer texture than fresh masa.  Tortillas, Tamales, and Corn Chips   Tortillas are made by forming finely ground  masa into thin sheets, then quickly cooking them, traditionally on a hot pan for a  minute or two, now in continuous commercial ovens for 20–40 seconds. Tamales  are small cakes of masa that enclose a filling, and are traditionally formed in the  papery husks of corn ears and steamed. The dough is moistened with a broth and  enriched, flavored, and aerated by beating it thoroughly with lard. The lard is  semisolid at room temperature and helps lubricate the masa materials and trap air  bubbles in a fluffy mass that expands during steaming. And fried chips are made
both from tortillas and directly from masa. Tortilla chips are made by deep-frying  tortillas, while corn chips are made by forming strips of lower-moisture, coarse  masa and then deep-frying them.  Minor Cereals  The following cereals are only occasionally encountered in Europe and the United  States, though some are very important in the dry tropics and subtropics.  Fonio   Fonio and black fonio are African grasses distantly related to maize and  sorghum.   Digitaria exilis   and   D. iburua   were domesticated on the West African  savanna around 5000   BCE , and are typical cereals in most respects. The tiny grains  are made into porridge and couscous, popped, brewed into beer, and mixed with  wheat to make breads.  Millet   Millet is the name used for a number of different grains, all of them with  very small round seeds, 1–2 mm   in   diameter (species   of   Panicum, Setaria,  Pennisetum, Eleusine ). The millets are native to Africa and Asia, and have been  cultivated for 6,000 years. They’re especially important in arid lands because they  have one of the lowest water requirements of any cereal, and will grow in poor  soils. The grains are remarkable for their high protein content, from 16 to 22%, and  are popped and also made into porridge, breads, malts, and beers.  Sorghum   Sorghum ( Sorghum bicolor ) evolved in the steppes and savannas of  central and south Africa, was domesticated there around 2000   BCE , and soon after  was taken to India and then to China. Thanks to their tolerance of drought and  heat, sorghums have become established in most warm countries with marginal  croplands. The fruits are small, around 4 mm long and 2 mm wide, and are boiled  like rice, popped, and used in many different variations on porridges, flatbreads,  couscous, and beers. Sorghum shouldn’t be sprouted; as the seed germinates, it  produces a protective cyanide-generating system (p. 258).  Teff   Teff,   Eragrostis tef,   is the major crop in Ethiopia, but rarely grown elsewhere. Its  tiny (1 mm) seeds come in a variety of colors, from dark to red and brown to white,  with the pigmented varieties said to have more flavor. Teff is most often made into  the spongy flatbread called injera, which unlike most breads stays soft and chewy  for several days.  Triticale   Triticale is a modern, artificial cross between wheat and rye (   Triticum   x
Secale ), first documented late in the 19th century and grown commercially  around1970. There are many different forms, the most commonly grown a cross  between durum wheat and rye. Its grains are generally more similar to wheat than  to rye, though the breadmaking qualities of most varieties aren’t as good as  wheat’s. Triticale is now mostly grown for animal feed, and is sometimes sold in  health food stores.  Pseudocereals  Amaranth, buckwheat, and quinoa are not members of the grass family and so are  not true cereals, but their seeds resemble the cereal grains and are used in similar  ways.  Amaranth   Amaranth is the tiny seed, just 1–2 mm across, of three species of  Amaranthus   that originated in Mexico and Central and South America, and were  cultivated more than 5,000 years ago. (There are also species of amaranth native to  the Old World, but they are used exclusively as green vegetables.) Today amaranth  supplements other grains in many baked goods, breakfast cereals, and snacks. The  Aztec combination of popped seeds and sticky sweetener lives on in the Mexican  alegria   (“joy”) and Indian   laddoo.   Amaranth seeds contain substantially more  protein and oil than the cereals.  Buckwheat   Buckwheat,   Fagopyrum esculentum,   is a plant in the Polygonum family,  a relative of rhubarb and sorrel. It’s a native of central Asia, was domesticated in  China or India relatively recently, around 1,000 years ago, and was brought to  northern Europe during the Middle Ages. It tolerates poor growing conditions and  matures in a little over two months, so it has long been valued in cold regions with  short growing seasons.  Buckwheat kernels are triangular, a sixth to a third of an inch/4–9 mm across, with  a dark hull (pericarp). The inner seed is a mass of starchy endosperm surrounding a  small embryo and contained in a light green-yellow seed coat. Intact seeds with  the hull removed are called groats. Buckwheat is about 80% starch and 14%  protein, mostly salt-soluble globulins. It contains about double the oil of most  cereals, and this limits the shelf life of groats and flour. The hulled groats are about  0.7%   phenolic   compounds,   some   of   which   give   the   grain   its   characteristic  astringency. The distinctive aroma of cooked buckwheat has nutty, smoky, green,  and slightly fishy notes (due respectively to pyrazines, salicylaldehyde, aldehydes,
and pyridines).  Buckwheat flour contains a small amount of mucilage, a complex carbohydrate a  bit like amylopectin — it’s made up of about 1,500 sugar molecules bonded  together into a branched structure. Though a minor component in the flour, the  mucilage absorbs water and may provide some of the stickiness that barely holds  an all-buckwheat noodle together (p. 577).  Buckwheat is a staple food in parts of China, Korea, and Nepal. In the Himalayan  region, buckwheat is used to make   chillare,   a flatbread, as well as fritter-like  pakoras and sweets. In northern Italy, it’s mixed with wheat to make flat noodles  called   pizzoccheri,   and mixed with corn meal in polenta. In Russia it’s used to make  the small pancakes called blini; and whole groats are toasted to make the nutty-  tasting porridge kasha. In Brittany it produces distinctive crêpes. The Japanese  make   soba,   buckwheat noodles. In the United States it’s most often encountered in  pancakes, to which it contributes tenderness and a nutty aroma.  Quinoa   Quinoa is a native of northern South America, was domesticated near Lake  Titicaca in the Andes around 5000   BCE , and was a staple food of the Incas, second in  importance only to the potato.   Chenopodium quinoa   is in the same family as beets  and spinach. The grains are small yellow spheres between 1 and 3 mm across. The  outer pericarp of many quinoa varieties contains bitter defensive compounds  called saponins, which can be removed by brief washing and rubbing in cold water  (prolonged soaking deposits saponins within the seed). Quinoa can be cooked like  rice or added to soups and other liquid dishes; it’s also popped, and is ground and  made into a variety of flatbreads.  Legumes: Beans and Peas  Beans and peas belong to the third largest family among the flowering plants  (after the orchid and daisy families), and the second most important family in the  human diet, after the grasses. The distinctive contribution of the legumes is their  high content of protein, two to three times that of wheat and rice, which they  develop thanks to their symbiosis with certain soil bacteria. Species of   Rhizobium  bacteria invade the roots of legume plants and convert abundant nitrogen in the  air into a form that the plant can use directly to make amino acids and thus  proteins. Legumes have long been an essential alternative to protein-rich but more  costly animal foods, and are especially prominent in the foods of Asia, Central and
South America, and the Mediterranean. A remarkable sign of their status in the  ancient world is the fact that each of the four major legumes known to Rome lent  its name to a prominent Roman family: Fabius comes from the fava bean, Lentulus  from the lentil, Piso from the pea, and Cicero — most distinguished of them all —  from the chick pea. No other food group has been so honored!  There are about 20 different species of legume cultivated on a large scale (see box,  p. 484). The oil crops, soybean and peanut, far outdistance the legumes eaten more  or less whole; the oils are used industrially as well as in the kitchen, and soybeans  are a major livestock feed in the United States.  Some Common Beans and Peas  Common Name   Scientific Name  Natives of Europe and Southwest Asia  Chickpea, garbanzo, bengal gram   Cicer arietinum  Lentil, masoor dal   Lens culinaris  Pea   Pisum sativum  Fava bean, broad bean   Vicia faba  Lupine   Lupinus   species  Alfalfa   Medicago sativa  Natives of India and East Asia  Soybean   Glycine max  Mung bean, green/golden gram   Vigna radiata  Black gram, urad dal   Vigna mungo  Azuki bean   Vigna acutifolia  Rice bean   Vigna umbellata  Moth bean   Vigna aconitifolia  Pigeon pea, red gram   Cajanus cajan  Lathyrus, vetch, khesari dal   Lathyrus sativus
Common Name   Scientific Name  Hyacinth bean   Lablab purpureus  Winged bean   Psophocarpus tetragonolobus  Natives of Africa  Black-eyed pea, cowpea, crowder   Vigna unguiculata  Bambara groundnut   Vigna subterranea  Natives of Central and South America  Bean, common bean, haricot, etc.   Phaseolus vulgaris  Lima bean, butter bean   Phaseolus lunatus  Tepary bean   Phaseolus acutifolius  Runner bean   Phaseolus coccineus  Peanut   Arachis hypogaea  Legume Structure and Composition  Legume seeds consist of an embryonic plant surrounded by a protective seed coat.  The embryo in turn is made up of two large storage leaves, the cotyledons,  together with a tiny stem. The cotyledons provide the bulk of the nourishment, as  the   endosperm   does   in   the   grains.   In   fact,   the   cotyledons   are   actually   a  transformed endosperm. When pollen joins ovule in the process of fertilization,  both an embryo and a primitive nutritional tissue, the endosperm, are formed. In  the grains, the endosperm develops along with the embryo and remains the  storage organ of the mature fruit. But in the legumes, the endosperm is absorbed  by the embryo, which repackages the nutrients in its cotyledons.  The seed coat is interrupted only at the hilum, the small depression where the seed  has been attached to the pod, and where it will absorb water once it’s in the  ground or the pot. The seed coat may be fairly thin, as in the peanut, but is as  much as 15% by weight of the chickpea and 30% of the lupin. The legume seed  coat is almost entirely cell-wall carbohydrates, and includes most of the seed’s  indigestible fiber. The coats of colorful varieties — pinks, reds, black — are rich in
anthocyanin   pigments   and   related   phenolic   compounds,   and   therefore   in  antioxidant power.  The anatomy of a legume seed. A side view with one of the two cotyledons removed  to show the embryo. The hilum is a small pore through which water can pass directly  to the embryo; it and the seed coat control the rate at which dry beans and peas  absorb water and soften during cooking.  Most beans and peas are mainly protein and starch (see box, p. 489). The major  exceptions are soybeans and peanuts, which are around 25% and 50% oil  respectively. Many legumes are several percent sucrose by weight, and noticeably  sweet.  Some legume seeds are rich in defensive secondary compounds (p. 258), notably  protease inhibitors, lectins, and in the case of tropical lima beans, cyanide-  generating compounds (American and European lima varieties generate little or  no cyanide). Animals fed a diet of raw beans will actually   lose   weight. All of these  potentially toxic compounds are disabled or removed by cooking.  Seed Colors   The colors of beans and peas are determined mainly by anthocyanin  pigments in the seed coat. Solid reds and blacks generally survive cooking, while  mottled patterns become washed out when the water-soluble pigments leak into  adjacent nonpigmented areas and into the cooking water. The intensity of color is  best maintained by minimizing the amount of cooking water; start the beans in  just enough water to cover, and add water only as needed to keep them barely  covered. Persistently green peas and dried beans owe their color to chlorophyll.  Pale beans with translucent seed coats sometimes develop a delicate pink color in  the small embryonic stem when they’re cooked. This is probably a result of the
same reaction that causes the reddening of poached quinces and pears (p. 281).  Legumes and Health: The Intriguing Soybean  Beans and peas are generally excellent sources of a number of nutrients, including  protein, iron, various B vitamins, folic acid, and starch or oil. Varieties with colored  seed coats provide valuable antioxidants. Among all the legumes, however,  soybeans   appear   to   have   unusual   potential   for   affecting   human   health.  Epidemiological studies have shown that countries in which soybeans are a staple  food, notably China and Japan, have significantly lower rates of heart disease and  cancer. It may be that soybeans are part of the explanation.  It turns out that soybeans contain storage forms of several phenolic compounds  called   isoflavones,   which are liberated by the action of our intestinal bacteria as  active compounds (genistein, daidzein, and glycitein) that resemble the human  hormone estrogen. The active forms are therefore referred to as “phytoestrogens”  (from the Greek   phyton,   “leaf”). Mung beans and other legumes also contain  isoflavones, but in much smaller quantities. (Of commonly eaten soy foods, the  boiled whole beans contain by far the greatest concentration of isoflavones, about  double the amount found in tofu.) Phytoestrogens do appear to have hormone-  like and other effects on the human body. There’s evidence that they may slow  bone loss and the development of prostate cancer and heart disease. However,  some studies suggest that phytoestrogens can worsen preexisting breast cancer,  and   are   protective   against   some   cancers   only   when   consumed   during  adolescence. Our understanding of phytoestrogens is still very incomplete. It’s too  early to say whether soybeans are more beneficial to human health than any other  seed, or whether it’s a good idea to eat them often.  Saponins   are soap-like defensive compounds that have a water-soluble end and a  fat-soluble end, so they can act as emulsifiers and foam stabilizers. They’re one of  the reasons that a pot of soybeans boils over so readily! Soybeans are a rich source  of saponins, which may make up 5% of their total weight, about half of which is in  the   hulls.   Some   plant   saponins   are   so   strong   that   they   damage   our   cell  membranes. Soy saponins are gentler, and bind to cholesterol so that the body  can’t absorb it efficiently. Soybeans are also a good source of phytosterols,  chemical   relatives   of   cholesterol   that   also   interfere   with   our   absorption   of  cholesterol and thus lower blood cholesterol levels.
The Problem of Legumes and Flatulence  Several chemical constituents of beans are responsible for an uncomfortable,  sometimes embarrassing consequence of eating legumes: the generation of gas in  the digestive system.  The Cause: Indigestible Carbohydrates   Everyone produces a mixture of gases  from their intestine, about a quart a day, thanks to the growth and metabolism of  our resident bacteria. Many legumes, especially soy, navy, and lima beans, cause a  sudden increase in bacterial activity and gas production a few hours after they’re  consumed. This is because they contain large amounts of carbohydrates that  human   digestive   enzymes   can’t   convert   into   absorbable   sugars.   These  carbohydrates therefore leave the upper intestine unchanged and enter the lower  reaches, where our resident bacterial population does the job we are unable to do.  One   kind   of   troublesome   carbohydrate   is   the   oligosaccharides,   molecules  consisting of three, four, and five sugar molecules linked together in an unusual  way. But the latest research suggests that the oligosaccharides are not the primary  source of gas. The cell-wall cements generate just as much carbon dioxide and  hydrogen as the oligosaccharides — and beans generally contain about twice as  much of these carbohydrates as they do oligosaccharides.  The Cures: Soaking, Long Cooking   A commonly used method for reducing the  gassiness of beans is to boil them briefly in excess water, let them stand for an  hour, then discard the soaking water and start the cooking with fresh water. This  does leach out most of the water-soluble oligosaccharides — but it also leaches  out significant quantities of water-soluble vitamins, minerals, simple sugars, and  seed-coat pigments: that is, nutrients, flavor, color, and antioxidants. That’s a high  price to pay. An alternative is simple prolonged cooking, which helps by eventually  breaking down much of the oligosaccharides and cell-wall cements into digestible  single   sugars.   Oligosaccharides   are   also   consumed   by   the   bean   during  germination, and consumed by microbes during fermentation: so sprouts, miso,  and soy sauce, as well as extracts like bean curd, are less offensive than whole  beans.  Bean Flavor  Beans owe their typical beany flavor to a large endowment of the enzyme
lipoxygenase, which breaks unsaturated fatty acids into small, odorous molecules.  The   main   components   of   beaniness   are   grassy   hexanal   and   hexanol   and  mushroomy octenol. Lipoxygenase gets its chance to act when the bean cells are  damaged and there’s enough moisture and oxygen available: for example, when  fresh beans are bruised, or dried damaged beans are soaked or brought slowly to a  boil. The strong beaniness of soybean products is generally accepted in Asia but  objected to in the West, where food scientists have developed techniques to  minimize it (see box, p. 494). The aroma of cooked beans also has a distinct sweet  note, which comes from lactones, furans, and maltol.  Some   beans   may   be   warehoused   for   years   before   they   find   their   way   to  supermarkets or into prepared foods. Prolonged storage causes legumes to lose  some typical flavor notes and accumulate stale ones.  Bean Sprouts  Bean sprouts are best known from the cooking of China, where mung bean  sprouts became popular in the south and soybean sprouts in the north about  1,000 years ago. Many other legumes are sprouted in Asia and elsewhere, from the  tiny alfalfa seed to the massive fava bean. Cooks sometimes trim larger sprouts of  their rootlets, primordial leaves, and dense cotyledons, so that the subtle texture  and flavor of the stems can be enjoyed without distraction. Sprouts are generally  cooked minimally if at all to preserve the delicate flavor and tender but crunchy  texture.  Cooking Legumes  Most mature legume seeds are starchy, and require cooking in water to soften the  cotyledon cell walls and starch granules. Fresh shell beans are mature but still  moist, and so cook fairly quickly, in 10 to 30 minutes. They’re also sweeter than the  dried beans. Peas, lima beans, cranberry beans, and soybeans ( edamame ) are the  legumes most commonly eaten fresh.  Whole dried beans and peas can take an hour or two to cook, much longer than  the dried grains. This is due in part to their larger size, but also to the effectiveness  of their seed coat at controlling the absorption of water, which is necessary for  softening the cell walls and starch. Initially water can enter only through the hilum,  the little pore on the curved back of the bean. After 30–60 minutes in cool water
(more quickly in hot), the seed coat has become fully hydrated and expanded.  From this point on, most of the water flowing into the bean passes across the  entire seed coat surface, but the rate of flow is still limited. Legumes whose hulls  have been removed — split peas, many Indian   dals   — cook more quickly and  disintegrate into a mush.  The Cooking Liquid   The quality of cooked beans and the time it takes to cook  them depend on the cooking liquid. In vegetable cooking, large volumes of  vigorously boiling water minimize enzyme damage to vitamins and pigments by  keeping the temperature high when the vegetables are added. Long-cooked  legumes are a different story. The greater the volume of cooking water, the more  color, flavor, and nutrients are leached out of the beans, and the more they’re  diluted. So these seeds are best cooked in just enough water for them to soak up  and   to cook in. And though boiling temperatures speed cooking, the turbulence of  boiling water can damage the seed coats and cause the beans to disintegrate;  lower temperatures (180–200ºF/80–93ºC) are slower but gentler.  The cooking water’s content of dissolved substances also affects cooking times  and textures. Hard water with high levels of calcium or magnesium actually  reinforces the bean cell walls (p. 282). It can therefore slow the softening of the  beans or even prevent them from softening fully. Acidic cooking liquids slow the  dissolving of cell-wall hemicelluloses and therefore the softening process, while  alkaline cooking water has the reverse effect. Finally, many cooks and cookbooks  say that adding salt to the cooking water prevents beans from softening. It does  slow the rate at which they absorb water, but they do eventually absorb it and  soften. And when beans are pre-soaked in salted water, they actually cook much  faster (below).  Maintaining the Texture of Cooked Beans   Three substances slow the softening  of beans and therefore make it possible for the cook to simmer beans for hours or  reheat them without disintegrating them.   Acids   make the cell-wall hemicelluloses  more stable and less dissolvable;   sugar   helps reinforce cell-wall structure and slows  the swelling of the starch granules; and   calcium   cross-links and reinforces cell-wall  pectins. So such ingredients as molasses — somewhat acid and rich in both sugar  and calcium — and acidic tomatoes can preserve bean structure during long  cooking or reheating, as for example in baked beans.  Reducing Cooking Times by Presoaking   Though beans are an ideal food for slow,
easy cooking in a low oven, it’s sometimes desirable to cook them faster. In  mountainous areas, where high altitude lowers the boiling point, the cooking of  dry beans can become an all-day affair.  There are several different ways to reduce the cooking time of beans and peas. The  simplest way is to soak dried beans in water before cooking them. This reduces  cooking time by 25% or more, and for a very basic reason: heat penetrates a dry  seed faster than water does. If beans are cooked directly from the dry state, much  of the cooking time is actually spent waiting for water to get to the center.  Meanwhile the outer portions of the bean cook more than they need to and may  get undesirably fragile.  Soaking Times Depend on Temperature   Medium-sized beans absorb more than  half of their total water capacity in the first two hours of soaking, and plateau at  about double their original weight after 10–12 hours. As the soaking temperature  goes up, absorption accelerates; and if the beans are first blanched for 1.5 minutes  in boiling water, the subsequent water absorption takes only two to three hours in  cool water, because the blanching rapidly hydrates the seed coat that controls  water movement.  Salt and Baking Soda Speed Cooking   Cooking times can be reduced even more  by adding various salts to the soaking water. Plain salt at a concentration around  1% (10 g/l, or 2 teaspoons/qt) speeds cooking greatly, apparently because the  sodium displaces magnesium from the cell-wall pectins and so makes them more  easily dissolved. Baking soda at 0.5% (1 teaspoon/qt) can reduce the cooking time  by nearly 75%; it contains sodium and in addition is alkaline, which facilitates the  dissolving of the cell-wall hemicelluloses. Of course, added salts affect both the  taste and texture of the cooked beans. The alkalinity of baking soda can give an  unpleasantly slippery mouth feel and soapy taste. And salt reduces the swelling  and gelation of starch granules within beans, which means that it favors a mealy  internal texture over a creamy one.  Pressure Cooking   Thanks to its temperature of around 250ºF/120ºC, pressure  cooking can cut the cooking time of beans and peas by half or more. Salt-  presoaked beans may take just 10 minutes.
Briefly Fermented Legumes in India  Though India isn’t as fond of fermented foods as many other countries, it did  find ways of turning legume and rice gruels into slightly raised pancakes and  steamed cakes. In the making of the cakes called   idli,   cooked black gram and  rice are ground and mixed to make a thick batter, then allowed to ferment  overnight. The same lactic acid bacteria found in fermented milks and creams  ( Leuconostoc mesenteroides, Lactobacillus delbrueckii   and   L. lactis,  Streptococcus faecalis ) as well as some yeasts ( Geotrichum candidum,  Torulopsis   species) feed on the sugars and produce acids, aroma compounds,  carbon dioxide gas, and viscous, sticky carbohydrates that thicken the batter  and help trap the gas bubbles. The batter is then steamed to produce a  spongy, delicately flavored cake.   Dhokla   is a similar preparation made using  rice and chickpeas. The   dosa,   a large fried disc, crêpe-like but crisp, is made  from a thin fermented batter of rice and black gram.   Papadums,   a familiar side  dish in Indian restaurants in the West, are thin wafers of black gram paste that  has been allowed to ferment for a few hours before being cut into discs and  dried; they’re then fried and develop a blistered, delicately brittle texture.  Persistently Hard Beans   One problem that cooks commonly encounter when  cooking dry beans is that some batches take unusually long to soften, or never  quite do soften. This may have been caused by growing conditions on the farm, or  storage conditions after harvest.  “Hard-seed” is a characteristic found in beans when temperatures are high and  humidity and water supply are low during the growing season. The outer seed coat  gets very water-resistant, so it takes much longer for water to move into the bean  interior. Hard-seed beans are usually smaller than normal beans, so they can  sometimes be avoided by picking over the beans and discarding the smallest ones  before cooking.  “Hard-to-cook” beans, on the other hand, are normal when harvested, but become  resistant to softening when they’re stored for a long time — months — at warm  temperatures and high humidities. This resistance results from a number of  changes in bean cell walls and interiors, including the formation of woody lignin,  the conversion of phenolic compounds into tannins that cross-link proteins, and
the denaturation of storage proteins to form a water-resistant coating around the  starch granules. There’s no way to reverse these changes and make hard-to-cook  beans as soft as regular beans. And there’s no way to spot them before cooking.  Once cooked, they’re likely to be smaller than normal and so may be picked out  before serving.  The Composition of Dry and Sprouted Legumes  Legume Seed   Water   Protein   Carbohydrate   Oil  Common bean   14   22   61   2  Fava bean   14   25   58   1  Lima bean   14   20   64   2  Mung bean   14   24   60   1  sprout   90   4   7   0.2  Soybean   10   37   34   18  sprout   86   6   6   1  Lentil   14   25   60   1  Chickpea   14   21   61   5  Pea   14   24   60   1  Roasting   Though most legumes are cooked in liquid to soften their starch and cell  walls, a few are parched in dry heat to create a crisp texture. Peanuts are the most  commonly roasted of the legumes, thanks to their nut-like oil content and  relatively   tender   cotyledons.   Other   beans   with   lower   oil   contents,   notably  soybeans and chickpeas, are also roasted to make a nut-like seed. Because their  cotyledons are harder, they’re soaked in water first, then roasted. The initial high  temperature and moisture soften the cotyledon cell walls and starch granules;  continued roasting evaporates most of the water to give a crisp rather than hard  texture. The roasting can be done in a hot pan or oven, or — as is done in Asia — in  sand that has been heated to 500–600ºF/ 250–300ºC. In India, for example,  chickpeas are heated to around 180ºF/80ºC, moistened with water, rested for some
hours, then roasted in hot sand so that they puff and the seed coat can be rubbed  off.  Characteristics of Some common Legumes  Fava or Broad Beans   The fava bean or broad bean,   Vicia faba,   is the largest of the  commonly eaten legumes, and was the only bean known to Europe until the  discovery of the New World. It apparently originated in west or central Asia, and  was among the earliest domesticated plants. Larger cultivated forms have been  found in Mediterranean sites dating to 3000   BCE . There are several sizes, the largest  of which seems to have been developed in the Mediterranean region around 500  CE . China is the world’s largest producer.  Fava beans are unusual in having a thick, tough seed coat that’s often removed  from both the meaty cotyledons of the unripe green seeds and from the hard dry  seeds. A blanching in alkaline water loosens and softens the coat. In Egypt, the  popular dish called   ful medames   is made by boiling the mature beans until soft,  then flavoring with salt, lemon juice, oil, and garlic. Mature fava beans are also  sprouted, then boiled to make a soup.  Favism   Eating fava beans is the cause of a serious disease, favism, in people who  have an inherited deficiency of a particular enzyme. Most victims are children who  live in the southern Mediterranean and Middle East, or whose ancestors came from  that region. When they are exposed to two unusual amino-acid relatives (vicine  and convicine) in the beans and in the flower pollen, their bodies metabolize these  chemicals to forms that damage their red blood cells and cause serious, sometimes  fatal anemia. The enzyme deficiency also turns out to suppress the growth of the  malaria parasite in red blood cells, so it may actually have been an advantageous  genetic trait before malaria was brought under control.  Chickpea or Garbanzo   Chickpeas are a native of arid southwest Asia, and like the  fava bean, pea, and lentil have been cultivated for about 9,000 years. There are two  general types, desi and kabuli. Desi are closer to the wild chickpea, with small  seeds, a thick, tough seed coat, and a dark color from abundant phenolic  compounds. They’re the main variety grown in Asia, Iran, Ethiopia, and Mexico. The  kabuli type, more common in the Middle East and Mediterranean, is larger, cream-  colored, with a thin, light seed coat. There are also varieties with dark green  cotyledons. Chickpeas are notable among the legumes for being about 5% oil by
weight; most others are 1–2%.  The name comes from the bean’s Latin name,   cicer ; in the botanical name,   Cicer  arietinum,   the second word means “ram-like” and refers to the seed’s resemblance  to a ram’s head, complete with curling horns. The Spanish   garbanzo   derives from  the Greek name. Today, this legume is a frequent ingredient in many Middle  Eastern and Indian dishes. Hummus is a chickpea paste flavored with garlic,  paprika, and lemon that is popular in the eastern Mediterranean; in parts of Italy,  flatbreads are made from chickpea flour. Chickpeas are the most important  legume in India, where they’re hulled and split to make chana dal, ground into  flour for papadums, pakoras, and other fried goods, and are boiled, roasted, and  sprouted.  Common Bean, Lima Bean, Tepary Bean   The common bean, lima bean, and  tepary bean are the important domesticated species of the 30 or so species in the  Central American genus   Phaseolus.  Food Words:   Bean, Frijol  The term “bean” that we apply to many different legumes from Eurasia, East  Asia, and the Americas originally referred only to the fava bean. The Indo-  European root   bhabha   gave us both “fava” and “bean.” By Greek and Roman  times, the African cowpea or black-eyed pea was also known in the  Mediterranean and given the Latin name   phaseolus   — the source of the  Spanish   frijol,   and the scientific name for the common beans from the New  World.  Common Bean   The most important species of   Phaseolus   is   P. vulgaris,   or the  common bean. The ancestral plant was a native of southwestern Mexico, and the  highest consumption of the common bean is still in Latin America. It first came  under cultivation about 7,000 years ago, and gradually diffused both north and  south, reaching the major continents about 2,000 years ago, and Europe during  the age of exploration. The common bean has been developed into many  hundreds of varieties of different sizes, shapes, seed-coat colors and color patterns,  shininess, and flavors. Most large-seeded varieties (kidney, cranberry, large red,
and white) came originally from the Andes, and became established in the  American Northeast, Europe, and Africa; smaller-seeded central American types  (pinto, black, small red, and white) were concentrated in the American Southwest.  In the United States, there are more than a dozen commercial categories based on  color and size. Beans are cooked in many ways: simply boiled, made into stews,  soups, pastes, cakes, and sweet desserts.  Popping Bean   A special kind of common bean is the nuña, or popping bean,  which has been cultivated for several thousand years in the high Andes. It can be  popped by just 3–4 minutes of high dry heat — a great advantage in the fuel-poor  mountains — or in the microwave oven. It doesn’t expand nearly as much as  popcorn and remains fairly dense, with a powdery texture and nutty flavor.  Lima Bean   The use of the common bean in Peru was predated by the larger lima  bean — the name derives from Peru’s capital — which was native to Central  America and domesticated somewhat later than the common bean. Both species  were exported to Europe by Spanish explorers. The lima bean was introduced to  Africa via the slave trade, and is now the main legume of that continent’s tropics.  The wild type and some tropical varieties contain potentially toxic quantities of a  cyanide defense system, and must be thoroughly cooked to be safe (common  commercial varieties are cyanide-free). Lima beans are eaten both fresh and dried.  Tepary Bean   Tepary beans, small brown natives of the American southwest, are  unusually tolerant of heat and water stress. They’re especially rich in protein, iron,  calcium, and fiber, and have a distinctive, sweet flavor reminiscent of maple sugar  or molasses.  Lentil   The lentil is probably the oldest cultivated legume, contemporaneous with  wheat and barley and often growing alongside these grasses. Its native ground is  arid Southwest Asia, and it’s now commonly eaten across Europe and Asia. Most  lentils are produced in India and Turkey, with Canada a distant third. The Latin  word for lentil,   lens,   gives us our word for a lentil-shaped, or doubly convex, piece  of glass (the coinage dates from the 17th century). Lentils contain low levels of  antinutritional factors and cook quickly.  Lentils are divided into two groups: varieties with flat and large seeds, 5 mm or  more across, and varieties with small, more rounded seeds. Large varieties are  more commonly grown, while the small, finer-textured ones include the prized  green French lentille du Puy, the black beluga, and the green Spanish pardina.
There are varieties with brown, red, black, and green seedcoats; most have yellow  cotyledons, though some are red or green. Green seed coats can turn brown with  age and during cooking, thanks to the clustering of phenolic compounds into  large pigmented complexes (p. 269). Because they are flat and thin, with thin seed  coats, cooking water only has to penetrate a millimeter or two from each side, so  lentils soften much more quickly than most beans and peas, in an hour or less.  Traditional lentil dishes include Indian masoor dal, whole or hulled and split red  lentils cooked into a porridge, and Middle Eastern   koshary   or   mujaddharah,   a  mixture of whole lentils and rice.  Pea, Black-eyed Pea, Pigeon Pea  Pea   The pea has been cultivated for around 9,000 years and spread quite early  from the Middle East to the Mediterranean, India, and China. It’s a cool-climate  legume that grows during the wet Mediterranean winter and in the spring of  temperate countries. It was an important protein source in Europe in the Middle  Ages and later, as the old children’s rhyme attests: “Pease porridge hot, Pease  porridge cold, Pease porridge in the pot, Nine days old.” Today, two main varieties  are cultivated: a starchy, smooth-coated one that gives us dried and split peas, and  a wrinkly type with a higher sugar content, which is usually eaten when immature  as a green vegetable. Peas are unusual among legumes in retaining some green  chlorophyll in their dry cotyledons; their characteristic flavor comes from a  compound related to the aroma compound in green peppers (a methoxy-isobutyl  pyrazine).  Black-eyed Pea   The so-called black-eyed pea or cowpea is not really a pea, but an  African relative of the mung bean that was known to Greece and Rome and  brought to the southern United States with the slave trade. It has an eye-like  anthocyanin pigmentation around the hilum, and a distinctive aroma. A variety  that produces a very long pod and small seeds is the yard-long bean, a common  green vegetable in China (p. 336).  Pigeon Pea   Pigeon pea is a distant relative of the common bean, native to India,  and now grown throughout the tropics. In India it’s called toor dal or redgram  because the tough seed coat of many varieties is reddish brown, though it’s most  often hulled and split, and the cotyledons are yellow. It’s been cultivated for  around 2,000 years, and is made into a simple porridge. Like the other grams, it
contains little in the way of antinutritional factors.  Mung Bean, Black Gram, Azuki  The Grams   The legume genus   Vigna,   which is native to the Old World, provides the  small-seeded “grams” of India and a few other Asian and African seeds. Most of  them have the advantages of being small, quick-cooking, and relatively free of  antinutritional and discomforting compounds. Green gram, or mung beans, are  native to India, spread early on to China, and are now the most widely grown of  this group thanks to the popularity of their sprouts. Black gram or urad dal is the  most prized of the legumes in India, where it has been cultivated for more than  5,000 years and is eaten whole, split and dehulled, and ground into flour for cakes  and breads.  Rice beans are eaten primarily in Thailand and elsewhere in Indochina. The African  bambara groundnut resembles the peanut in being borne underground and  containing oil, but it isn’t nearly as rich as the peanut. In West Africa, the seeds are  eaten fresh, canned, boiled, roasted, and made into porridges and cakes.  Azuki Bean   Azuki or adzuki (Chinese   chi dou ) is an East Asian species of   Vigna, V.  angularis,   about 8 by 5 by 5 mm, and most commonly a deep maroon color, which  makes it a favorite ingredient for festive occasions. It was cultivated in Korea and  China at least 3,000 years ago, and taken later to Japan; it’s now the second most  important legume after the soybean in both Korea and Japan. Azuki are a favorite  sprouting seed, and are also candied, infused with sugar to make a dessert  topping, and used as a base for a hot drink. In Japan most of the azuki crop is made  into   an,   a sweet paste composed of equal parts sugar and ground twice-boiled  azuki, which are kneaded together.  Lupins   Lupins,   lupini   in Italian, come from several different species of   Lupinus  ( albus, angustifolius, luteus ). They’re unusual because they contain no starch —  they’re 30–40% protein, 5–10% oil, and up to 50% soluble but indigestible  carbohydrates (soluble fiber, p. 258). Though there are some “sweet” types that  require no special processing, many varieties contain bitter and toxic alkaloids and  so are soaked in water for up to several days to leach these substances out. They’re  then boiled until soft, and served in oil, or toasted and salted. A New World species,  L. mutabilis,   grown in the Andes, has a protein content approaching 50% of the dry  seed weight.
Soybeans and Their Transformations  Finally, the most versatile legume. Soybeans were domesticated in northern China  more than 3,000 years ago, and eventually became a staple food throughout much  of Asia; their spread was probably contemporary with and encouraged by the  vegetarian doctrine of Buddhism. They were little known in the West until late in  the   19th   century,   but   today   the   United   States   supplies   half   of   the   world  production, with China in fourth place after Brazil and Argentina. However, most  U.S. soybeans feed not people but livestock, and much of the rest are processed to  make cooking oil and a host of industrial materials.  The soybean’s many guises have been inspired by both its great virtues and its  defects. Soybeans are exceptionally nutritious, with double the protein content of  other legumes, a near-ideal balance of amino acids, a rich endowment of oil, and a  number of minor constituents that may contribute to our long-term health (p.  485). At the same time, they’re pretty unappealing. They contain abundant  antinutritional factors and gas-producing oligosaccharides and fiber. When boiled  in the usual way, they develop a strong “beany” flavor. And when cooked whole as  other beans are, they don’t become appealingly creamy; since they contain a  negligible amount of starch, their texture remains somewhat firm. The Chinese and  others developed two basic ways of making soybeans more palatable: extracting  their protein and oil in the form of a milk and then concentrating them in cheese-  like curds; and encouraging the growth of microbes that consume undesirable  substances and generate an appealing flavor. The results were bean curd and  soymilk skins; and soy sauce and miso, tempeh and natto.  The Beany Flavor of Soybeans  The strong aroma of simply cooked soybeans results from two qualities: their  high content of polyunsaturated oil, which is especially vulnerable to  oxidation, and their highly active oil-breaking enzymes. When the cells of the  bean are damaged and their contents mixed together, the enzymes and  oxygen break the long carbon chains of the oil into fragments five, six, and  eight carbon atoms long. These fragments have aromas reminiscent of grass,  paint, cardboard, and rancid fat, and the combination creates a smell usually
described as “beany.” Some bitter taste and astringency also develop,  probably due to free fatty acids or to soy isoflavones that are liberated from  their storage form (p. 485).  The key to minimizing the development of beany flavor is to inactivate the  beans’ enzymes quickly, before they have a chance to attack the oils. This is  done by soaking the beans to speed subsequent cooking, and then  immersing them in boiling water or pressure-cooking them.  Fresh Soybeans   One other way to make soybeans more palatable is to eat them  before they’re fully mature, when they’re sweeter, contain lower levels of gassy and  antinutritional   substances,   and   have   a   less   pronounced   beany   flavor.   Fresh  soybeans, Japanese   edamame   or Chinese   mao dou,   are specialized varieties  harvested at 80% maturity, still sweet and crisp and green, then boiled for a few  minutes in salted water. Green soybeans are around 15% protein and 10% oil.  Soybean Milk   The traditional method for making soymilk is to soak the beans until  soft, grind them, and either sieve out the solids and cook the milk (China) or cook  the slurry and then sieve out the solids (Japan). The result is a watery fluid filled  with soy proteins and microscopic droplets of soy oil. Either method results in a  strong soy flavor. The modern method that minimizes enzyme action and soy  flavor is to soak the dry beans (an hour at 150ºF/65ºC allows them to absorb their  full weight in water without significant cell damage), and then either quickly cook  them to 180–212ºF/80–100ºC before grinding, or grind them in that temperature  range in a preheated grinder and preheated water.  In the West, soymilk has become a popular alternative to cow’s milk, with a roughly  similar protein and fat content, but the fat less saturated (soy milk must be fortified  with calcium in order to be a good nutritional substitute). But it is dilute,  textureless, bland, and not very versatile. The Chinese found two ways to make it  more interesting (and to remove the gas-causing oligosaccharides): coagulate the  milk into surface skins, or coagulate it into curd.  Soymilk Skin   When animal or seed milks are heated in an uncovered pot, a skin of  coagulated   protein   forms   on   the   surface. The   skin   forms   because   proteins  unfolded by the heat concentrate at the surface, get tangled up with each other,  and then lose their moisture to the dry room air. As they dry, they get even more
tightly tangled, and form a thin but solid protein sheet, entrapping oil droplets and  developing a fibrous, chewy texture.  Such skins are usually an annoyance, but some cultures make a virtue of them and  turn them into a dish. The Indians do this with cow’s milk, and for several centuries  the Chinese have been using soymilk to make   dou fu pi,   the Japanese   yuba,   which  they layer together to form a variety of sweet and savory products, some of them  shaped into flowers, fish, birds, even pigs’ heads. The skins are also meltingly  delicious when eaten just as they’re taken from the milk. At some Japanese  restaurants, a small pot of soy milk is heated at the table so diners can remove and  eat the skins as they form, then add a pinch of salts to the remaining liquid and  coagulate it into soft tofu.  Bean Curd, or Tofu   Bean curd is curdled soy milk, a concentrated mass of protein  and oil formed by coagulating the dissolved proteins with salts that yoke them and  the protein-coated oil droplets together. Bean curd was invented in China around  2,000 years ago, was well known by 500   CE , and became a daily food beginning  around 1300. Chinese bean curd is traditionally coagulated with calcium sulfate,  Japanese bean curd and bean curd from coastal regions of China with what the  Japanese call   nigari,   a mixture of magnesium and calcium salts left over when  table salt, sodium chloride, is crystallized from seawater.  Making Bean Curd   To make bean curd, cooked soy milk is cooled to about  175ºF/78ºC, then coagulated with calcium or magnesium salts dissolved in a small  amount of water. The coagulation takes 8–30 minutes. When the delicate, cloud-  like curds have formed, the remaining “whey” is ladled off, or the curd is broken up  to release water and drained. The resulting mass is then pressed for 15–25 minutes  while still quite hot, around 160ºF/70ºC, in order to form a cohesive mass that’s  around 85% water, 8% protein, and 4% oil. In commercial production, the curd is  cut into blocks, packaged in water, and the packages pasteurized by immersion in  hot water.  Soft or silken tofu, with a custard-like texture, is made by coagulating the soymilk  in the package so that the curd remains intact, full of moisture, and delicate.  Freezing Bean Curd   Tofu is one of the few foods that can be usefully altered by  freezing.   When   it   freezes,   the   coagulated   proteins   become   even   more  concentrated, and the solid ice crystals form pockets in the protein network. When  the frozen curd thaws, the liquid water flows from the toughened spongy network,
especially when the curd is pressed. The sponge is then ready to absorb flavorful  cooking liquids, and has a chewier, meatier texture.  An Early Description of Tofu  One of the earliest European accounts of soybean curd is Friar Domingo  Navarrete’s, which dates from the 17th century. He called it  the most usual, common, and cheap sort of food all China abounds in,  and which all in that empire eat, from the Emperor to the meanest  Chinese; the Emperor and great men as a dainty, the common sort as  necessary sustenance. It is called Teu Fu, that is paste of kidney beans. I  did not see how they made it. They drew the milk out of the kidney  beans, and turning it, make great cakes of it like cheeses, as big as a  large sieve, and five or six fingers thick. All the mass is as white as the  very snow, to look to nothing can be finer…Alone it is insipid, but very  good dressed as I say and excellent fried in butter.  Fermented Bean Curd   Sufu   ( tou fu ru, fu ru ) is soybean curd fermented by molds in  the   genera   Actinomucor   and   Mucor,   producing   the   Chinese   and   vegetarian  equivalent of mold-ripened milk cheeses.  Fermented Soybean Products: Soy Sauce, Miso, Tempeh, Natto   The great  appeal of miso and soy sauce, long-fermented soy products, is their strong,  distinctive, and delicious flavor. It develops when microbes break down the bean  proteins and other components and transform them into savory substances that  then react with each other to generate additional layers of flavor. Tempeh and  natto are quick-fermented soy products with their own unusual qualities.  Two-Stage   Fermentations   Asian   mold   fermentations   generally   involve   two  distinct stages. In the first, dormant green spores of   Aspergillus   molds are mixed  with cooked grains or soybeans, which are then kept warm, moist, and well  aerated. The spores germinate and develop into a mass of thread-like hyphae,  which produce digestive enzymes that break down the food for energy and  building blocks. The second stage begins after about two days, when the enzymes  are at their peak. The mixture of food and hyphae, called   chhü   in China and   koji   in
Japan, is now immersed in a salt brine, often along with more cooked soybeans. In  the oxygen-poor brine, the molds die, but their enzymes continue to work. At the  same time, microbes that thrive in the absence of oxygen — salt-tolerant lactic  acid bacteria and yeasts — grow in the brine, consume some of the building  blocks, and contribute their own flavorful by-products to the mixture.  The Origins of Miso and Soy Sauce   The first foods that the ancient Chinese  fermented in brine were pieces of meat or fish. These were eventually replaced by  whole soybeans around the 2nd century   BCE . Soy paste became the major  condiment around 200   CE   and remained so through around 1600, when it was  replaced by soy sauce. Soy sauce began as a residue resulting when soy paste was  made with excess liquid, but it became more popular than the paste, and by 1000  was prepared for its own sake.  Chinese Soy Pastes and Sauces  A number of the condiments used in Chinese cooking as sauces or sauce  bases are variations on mold-fermented soybeans, or   chiang.   Their Chinese  names reflect this. Some examples are:  •   Bean sauce,   yuen-shi chiang,   made from the residue of soy-sauce  making, used to make savory sauces  •   Bean paste,   to-pan chiang,   essentially a chunky wheat-barley-soy miso,  used to make savory sauces  •   Hoisin sauce,   ha-hsien chiang,   made from the residue of soy-sauce  making, mixed with wheat flour, sugar, vinegar, chilli pepper; served  with Peking duck and mu shu pork  •   Sweet wheat chiang,   t’inmin chiang,   smooth, soft, brown; made from  wheat flour formed into steamed buns or flat sheets, allowed to mold,  then brined; used as the base for Peking duck dipping sauce  Fermented soy pastes and soy sauce were carried by Buddhist monks to Japan,  where sometime around 700   CE   a new Japanese name,   miso   —   mi   meaning flavor  — was given to distinctive Japanese versions of the paste. These involved the use
of a grain-based koji that provided sweetness, alcohol, finer aromatics, and  delicacy. Until the 15th century, Japanese soy sauce was simply the excess fluid, or  tamari, ladled from finished soybean miso. By the 17th century, the now-standard  formula of roasted cracked wheat and soybeans had been established for making  the sauce, and the resulting product given a new name, shoyu. Shoyu began to  appear on western tables as an exotic and expensive item by the 17th century.  Miso   Miso is used as a soup base, as a seasoning for various dishes, in marinades,  and as a medium for pickling vegetables. There are dozens of different varieties.  Miso is made by cooking a grain or legume — usually rice, sometimes barley,  sometimes soybean — and fermenting it in shallow trays with koji starter for  several days to develop enzymes. The resulting koji is then mixed with ground  cooked soybeans, salt (5–15%), and a dose of an earlier batch of miso (to provide  bacteria and yeasts). In traditional miso making, the mixture is allowed to ferment  (and eventually age) in barrels for months to years at a warm 86–100ºF/30–38ºC.  Various   lactic   acid   bacteria   ( Lactobacilli,   Pediococci )   and   salt-tolerant   yeasts  ( Zygosaccharomyces, Torulopsis ) break down the seed proteins, carbohydrates, and  oils and produce a host of flavor molecules and flavor precursors. Browning  reactions generate deeper layers of flavor and color.  The Delightful Physics of Miso Soup  Miso soup is one of the most common Japanese dishes. It typically includes a  dashi broth (p. 238) and small cubes of tofu. As is true of many Japanese  preparations, miso soup is a delight to the eye as well as the palate. When the  soup is made and poured into the bowl, the miso particles disperse  throughout in an even haze. But left undisturbed for a few minutes, the  particles gather around the center of the bowl in discrete little clouds that  slowly change shape. The clouds mark convection cells, columns in the broth  where hot liquid from the bowl bottom rises, is made cooler and so more  dense by evaporation at the surface, falls again; is reheated and becomes less  dense, rises, and so on. Miso soup enacts at the table the same process that  produces towering thunderhead clouds in the summer sky.
Traditionally made miso ends up with a rich, savory, complex flavor dominated by  sweet and roasted notes, and sometimes by esters reminiscent of pineapple and  other fruits. Modern industrial production cuts the fermentation and aging from  months to a few weeks, and compensates for the resulting lack of flavor and color  with various additives.  Soy Sauce   Soy sauce is made in several different styles today. Broadly speaking,  the flavor of traditional soy sauce depends on the proportions of soybeans and  wheat. Most Chinese soy sauces, and Japanese tamari, are made primarily or  exclusively from soybeans. Japanese soy sauce is generally made from an even  mixture of soybeans and wheat, and the starch from the wheat gives it a  characteristic sweetness, a higher alcohol content, and more alcohol-derived  aromatics.   Shiro,   or “white” soy sauce, lighter in color and flavor, is made with more  wheat than soybeans.  Japanese Soy Sauce   Most of the soy sauce sold in the West is made in Japan or in  the Japanese style, which is summarized in the box on p. 498. During the initial  brief fermentation, the   Aspergillus   mold produces enzymes that will break down  wheat starch into sugars, wheat and soy proteins into amino acids, and seed oils  into fatty acids. Then during the longer main fermentation, these enzymes do their  work; yeasts produce alcohol and a range of taste and aroma compounds; and  bacteria produce lactic, acetic, and other acids, and yet other aromas. Over time,  the various enzymes and microbial products also react with each other, the sugars  and amino acids forming roasty-smelling pyrazines, acids and alcohols combining  to form fruity esters. The high-temperature pasteurization develops yet another  layer of flavor by encouraging browning reactions between amino acids and  sugars. The   result   is   a   liquid   that’s   salty,   tart,   sweet,   savory   (from   a   high  concentration of amino acids, mainly glutamic acid), with a rich aroma. Several  hundred   aroma   molecules   have   been   identified   in   soy   sauce,   with   roasty  compounds (furanones and pyrazines), sweet maltol, and a number of meaty sulfur  compounds among the more prominent. All in all, soy sauce is a concentrated,  mouth-filling liquid, a versatile flavor enhancer for other foods.
Making Japanese Soy Sauce  The more involved and time-consuming fermentation produces a much more  flavorful result than the quick chemical production method.  Tamari   Tamari   names a kind of Japanese soy sauce closest to its Chinese original:  made with little or no wheat, and therefore poor in alcohol and fruity esters  derived from it, but with a darker color and richer flavor thanks to the higher
concentration of soybean amino acids. Today tamari is sometimes stabilized with  added alcohol, which makes its aroma closer to that of ordinary shoyu. Even  stronger than true tamari is twice-fermented   saishikomi,   made by making up the  mash not with salt water, but with a previous batch of soy sauce.  “Chemical”   Soy Sauce   Industrial producers have been making nonfermented  approximations of soy sauce since the 1920s, when the Japanese first used  chemically modified soy protein (“hydrolyzed vegetable protein”) as an ingredient.  Nowadays, defatted soy meal, the residue of soybean oil production, is broken  down   —   hydrolyzed   —   into   amino   acids   and   sugars   with   concentrated  hydrochloric acid. This caustic mixture is then neutralized with alkaline sodium  carbonate, and flavored and colored with corn syrup, caramel, water, and salt. Such  quick “chemical” soy sauce has a very different character from the slow fermented  version, and is usually blended with at least some genuine fermented soy sauce to  make it palatable.  To make sure you’re buying genuine soy sauce, read the label carefully, and avoid  products that include added flavorings and colors.  Tempeh   Tempeh was invented in Indonesia, and unlike miso and soy sauce is not a  salty preserved condiment but an unsalted, quick-fermented, perishable main  ingredient. It’s made by cooking whole soybeans, forming them into thin layers,  and fermenting with a mold,   Rhizopus oligosporus   or   R. oryzae,   for 24 hours at a  warm, tropical temperature (85–90ºF/30–33ºC). The mold grows and produces  thread-like hyphae, which penetrate the beans and bind them together, and digest  significant amounts of protein and oil to flavorful fragments. Fresh tempeh has a  yeasty, mushroomy aroma; when sliced and fried, it develops a nutty, almost meaty  flavor.  Natto  Natto has been made in Japan for at least 1,000 years, and is notable for being  distinctly alkaline (from the breakdown of amino acids into ammonia) and for  developing a sticky, slippery slime that can be drawn with the tip of a chopstick  into threads up to 3 ft/1 m long! As with tempeh, no salt is used and the product is  perishable. The   whole   beans   are   cooked,   inoculated   with   a   culture   of   the  bacterium   Bacillus subtilis natto,   and held at about 100ºF/40ºC for 20 hours. Some  bacterial enzymes break down proteins into amino acids and oligosaccharides into
simple sugars, while others produce a range of aroma compounds (buttery  diacetyl, various volatile acids, nutty pyrazines), as well as long chains of glutamic  acid and long branched chains of sucrose, which form the slimy strings. Natto is  served atop rice or noodles, in salads and soups, or cooked with vegetables.  Some Traditional Fermented Soybean Preparations  Food   Names   Preparation   Qualities  Soy paste,  miso  Dou jiang;  miso  Beans plus grain  fermented with  molds, bacteria,  yeasts  Rich, savory, salty,  sometimes sweet  seasoning for many  dishes  Soy sauce   Jiang you;  shoyu;  kecap  Beans plus wheat  fermented with  molds, bacteria,  yeasts  Rich, savory, salty  seasoning for many  dishes  Black beans,  soy nuggets  Dou chi;  hamanatto  Beans and wheat  flour fermented with  mold  Savory, salty ingredient in  meat and vegetable  dishes  Fermented  tofu  Dou fu ru;  sufu  Tofu fermented with  mold  Cheese-like; a condiment  for various dishes  Natto   Na dou;  natto  Beans fermented  with special  bacterium  Soft, distinctive, sticky;  eaten with rice or  noodles  Tempeh   Tian bei;  tempeh  Dehulled beans  fermented with  special mold  Firm cake, mildly nutty  and mushroomy; main  ingredient often fried
The Original Ketchup  Fermented soy pastes and sauces developed into many different regional  variations in Asia. Among them is the Indonesian condiment   kecap,   whose  name gave us our term for a sweet-sour tomato condiment.   Kecap   is made by  allowing   Aspergillus   mold to grow on cooked soybeans for about a week,  brine-fermenting the moldy mass for 2 to 20 weeks, then boiling it for 4 to 5  hours, and filtering off the solids. The salty version is called   kecap asin.   To  make sweet   kecap manis,   palm sugar and a variety of spices — among them  galangal, makrut lime, fennel, coriander, and garlic — are added to the  fermented beans just before the boiling.  Nuts and Other Oil-Rich Seeds  From the first, the English word   nut   meant an edible seed surrounded by a hard  shell, and this remains the common meaning. Botanists later appropriated the  word to refer specifically to one-seeded fruits with a tough, dry fruit layer rather  then a fleshy, succulent one. Under this restricted definition, among common nuts  only acorns, hazelnuts, beechnuts, and chestnuts qualify as true nuts. The details of  anatomy aside, the various seeds that we call nuts differ from grains and legumes  in three important ways: they’re generally larger, richer in oil, and require little or  no cooking to be edible and nourishing. This combination of qualities made nuts  an important source of nourishment in prehistoric times. Today, they’re especially  appreciated for their characteristic rich flavor.  Walnuts, hazelnuts, chestnuts, and pine nuts all have both Old World and New  World species, because nut-bearing trees have been around a lot longer than the  other food plants, long enough that they existed before North America and Europe  split apart some 60 million years ago. Over the last few centuries, humans have  spread their prized nut species to nearly every region on the globe with a suitable  climate. California has become the largest producer of southwest Asian almonds  and walnuts, South American peanuts are grown throughout the subtropics, and  Asian coconuts throughout the tropics.
Nut Structures and Qualities  The bulk of most nuts consists of the embryo’s swollen storage leaves, or  cotyledons, but coconuts and pine nuts are monolithic masses of endosperm, and  the Brazil nut is a swollen embryonic stem. Unlike most grains and legumes, nuts  are delicious when eaten in their dry, nutrient-concentrated state, somewhat  crisped and browned by a quick roasting. Their weak cell walls make them tender,  their low starch content prevents them from seeming floury, and their oil gives  them a mouth-watering moistness.  An important feature of the nuts is the skin, a protective layer of varying thickness  that adheres to the kernel. Chestnut skins are thick and tough, hazelnut skins  papery and brittle. The nut skin is usually reddish-brown in color and astringent to  the taste. Both qualities are due to the presence of tannins and other phenolic  compounds, which may make up a quarter of the skin’s dry weight. Many of these  same phenolic compounds are effective antioxidants and so nutritionally valuable.  But because they’re astringent and discolor other ingredients (walnut skins turn  breads purple-gray), cooks often remove the skins from nuts.  The chestnut, with its shell and tough, adherent seed coat.  The Nutritional Value of Nuts  Nuts are very nutritious. After pure fats and oils, they’re the richest foods that we  eat,   averaging   around   600   calories   (kcal)   per   quarter-pound/100   gm;   by  comparison, fatty beef averages 200 calories, and dry starchy grains 350. Nuts can  be 50% or more oil, 10–25% protein, and are a good source of several vitamins and
minerals and of fiber.  Compositions of Common Nuts and Seeds  The following table gives the major components of nuts and seeds by  percentage of the seed’s edible weight. Chestnuts and coconut meat are  generally sold fresh and so have a relatively high water content.  Nut or Seed   Water   Protein   Oil   Carbohydrates  Almond   5   19   54   20  Brazil   5   14   67   11  Cashew   5   17   46   29  Chestnut   52   3   2   42  Coconut (meat)   51   4   35   9  Flaxseed   9   20   34   36  Hazelnut   6   13   62   17  Macadamia   3   8   72   15  Peanut   6   26   48   19  Pecan   5   8   68   18  Pine nut   6   31   47   12  Pistachio   5   20   54   19  Poppy seed   7   18   45   24  Sesame seed   5   18   50   24  Sunflower   5   24   47   20  Walnut, black   3   21   59   15  Walnut, English   4   15   64   16  Notable among the vitamins is the antioxidant vitamin E, especially concentrated  in hazelnuts and almonds, and folic acid, which is thought to be important for  cardiovascular health. Most nut oils are made up primarily of monounsaturated
fatty acids, and have more polyunsaturates than saturated fats (exceptions are  coconuts with a large dose of saturated fat, and walnuts and pecans, which are  predominantly polyun-saturated). And nut seed coats are rich in antioxidant  phenolic compounds. This cluster of characteristics — a favorable balance of fats,  copious antioxidants, and folic acid — may explain why epidemiological surveys  have found nut consumption to be associated with a reduced risk of heart disease.  Nut Flavor  Nuts provide us with a distinctive, appealing, and versatile set of flavors. Nuttiness  is a cluster of qualities: slightly sweet, slightly fatty, slightly roasted or toasted; a  delicate flavor, yet with some depth. The nuts’ ample endowment of oil is key to  their character; the less rich grains take on a pleasant flavor when simply toasted  dry, but develop an added dimension when cooked in oil or fat. The quality of  nuttiness complements many other foods, whether savory or sweet, all the way  from fish to chocolate.  Most nuts contain at least traces of free sugars. Some contain more than a trace  and are noticeably sweet; these include chestnuts, cashews, pistachios, and pine  nuts.  Handling and Storing Nuts  The same high oil content that makes nuts nutritious and delicious also makes  them much more fragile than grains and legumes: that oil readily absorbs odors  from the surroundings, and goes rancid when it’s split into its component fatty  acids and the fatty acids are then fragmented by oxygen and light. The fatty acids  have an irritating effect on the mouth, while their fragments have cardboard,  paint-like aromas. Walnuts, pecans, cashews, and peanuts are rich in fragile  polyunsaturated fats and are especially susceptible to staling. Fat rancidity is  favored by bruising, light, heat, and moisture, so it’s best to store nuts in opaque  containers at cool temperatures. Shell-less kernels are best refrigerated. Because  they contain very little water and so don’t suffer from the formation of damaging  ice crystals, nuts can be frozen for long keeping. Storage containers should be truly  air-and odor-tight — glass jars, for example, rather than permeable plastic bags.  Nuts are at their best when they’re freshly harvested, usually in late summer and  fall (early summer for almonds). Newly harvested nuts are too moist to keep
without being vulnerable to molds, so producers dry them with as little heat as  possible, usually at 90–100ºF/32–38ºC. When buying fresh nuts, look for an  opaque, off-white interior. Any translucency or darkening is a sign that the cells are  damaged, oil has been released, and rancidity is developing.  Cooking Nuts  Unlike most other seed foods, nuts are good simply oven-toasted or fried for a few  minutes, which transforms the chewy, pliable, bland, pale seeds into crisp,  flavorful, browned morsels. They can also be roasted in the microwave oven. Since  nuts are small and dry, frying is generally done at relatively low temperatures for  relatively   short   times,   250–350ºF/120–175ºC   for   a   few   minutes,   with   lower  temperatures and longer times for large nuts (Brazil nuts, macadamias). Doneness  should be judged by color and flavor, not texture; heat softens the tissue, which  gets crisp as it cools. Stop the cooking just short of the ideal doneness, since nuts  continue to cook for some time after they’re taken from the heat. Nuts are less  brittle when they’re warm, so slicing them while warm can give cleaner pieces with  fewer flakes and crumbs.  Commercially prepared nuts are often roasted, salted with special flake-shaped  particles that have more of a surface to adhere to the nut, then coated with a layer  of oil or a protein-emulsifier blend to help retain the salt. Peanuts are salted in the  shell by being soaked in brine under a vacuum, which pulls the air from inside the  shell and forces the brine in.  Removing Skins   Many preparations call for nut skins to be removed so that they  don’t discolor the dish or add unwanted astringency. Thin skins — those on  peanuts and hazelnuts, for example — can often be made brittle enough to rub off  by a brief toasting in the oven. The thicker skins of almonds are toughened and  loosened by a minute or two in boiling water. Others can often be removed by  immersing the nuts in hot water made alkaline with baking soda (3 Tb soda per  quart/45 gm per liter), rubbing the softened skins off (alkalinity helps dissolve  hemicellulose cement in the cell walls), then reimmersing the nuts in a dilute acid  solution to neutralize the slight amount of absorbed alkaline liquid. The color and  astringency of hard-to-remove walnut skins can be lightened significantly by a  brief boiling in acidified water, which leaches out tannins and bleaches the color of  those that remain. Tough chestnut skins are softened by roasting or boiling in the
shell, or by a brief period in the microwave oven. They’re also simply peeled off like  the skin of an apple.  Nut Pastes and Butters   All dry and fatty nuts can be ground in a mortar or  blender into a butter-like paste, with the oil from ruptured cells coating and  lubricating the cell fragments and particles of intact cells. One of the most  venerable nut pastes is the Middle Eastern tahini, made from ground sesame  seeds; it’s used with chickpeas to make hummus, and with eggplant to make baba  ghanoush. Throughout the world, nut pastes are added to soups and stews to  contribute flavor, richness, and body; almond soups are made in Spain and Turkey,  walnut soups in Mexico, coconut soups in Brazil, pecan and peanut soups in the  American South.  Nut Oils   The oils of a number of nuts are prized for their flavor — walnut oil and  coconut oil, for example — and several others as ordinary cooking oils (peanut oil,  sunflower seed oil).  Argan Oil  An unusual nut known in the West almost exclusively for its oil is argan, the  seed of a drought-tolerant tree native to Morocco ( Argania spinosa,   a relative  of the chicle and miracle fruit trees). The almond-like nuts are removed from  their fruits (a process formerly assigned to goats, which eat the fruits and  excrete the nuts), shelled and roasted, then ground and pressed. Argan oil has  a distinctive, almost meaty aroma.  Oils are extracted from nuts by two different means. “Cold-pressed” or “expeller-  pressed” nut oils are made by crushing the nut cells and forcing the oil out with  mechanical pressure. The nuts get hot from the pressure and friction, but generally  don’t exceed the boiling point. Solvent-extracted oils are made by dissolving the  oil out of the crushed nuts with a solvent at temperatures around 300ºF/150ºC,  then separating the oil from the solvent. They are more refined than pressed oils,  having fewer of the trace compounds that make oils both flavorful and potentially  allergenic (p. 455). Cold-pressed oils are generally used as a flavoring, refined oils  as cooking oils. Nut oils have a stronger flavor if the nuts are roasted before
extraction. Because they often have a large proportion of fragile polyunsaturated  fatty acids, they’re more vulnerable to oxidation than ordinary vegetable oils, and  are best kept in dark bottles in the refrigerator. The leftover solids — nut meal or  flour — make a flavorful and nutritious contribution to baked goods.  Nut Milks   If nuts are ground while dry, their microscopic oil bodies (p. 459) merge  and coalesce to make oil the continuous liquid phase of the paste. But if the raw  nuts are first soaked in water, then grinding releases the oil bodies relatively intact  into the continuous water phase. When the solid nut particles are strained off, this  leaves behind a fluid similar to milk, with oil droplets, proteins, sugars, and salts  dispersed in water. In medieval Europe, which learned about them from the Arabs,  almond milks and creams were both luxurious ingredients and dairy substitutes for  fasting days. Today, the most common seed milk is made from coconuts, but it can  be made from any oil-rich nut and from soybeans (p. 494).  Modern cooks can use nut milks to make rich and delicious ices, and to enrich  sauces and soups. Thanks to the tendency of the nut proteins to coagulate, cooks  can thicken nut milks with acid into the equivalent of yogurt, and cook them into a  cross between a pudding and custard. Almonds with their high protein content  produce the most easily thickened milk. Other nut milks can be boiled to  coagulate the proteins into curds, then the curds can be drained of excess fluid,  blended until smooth, and heated gently to thicken them further. To impart more  flavor to the milk, a small fraction of the nuts can be roasted before grinding.  Characteristics of Some Common Nuts  Almonds   Almonds are the world’s largest tree-nut crop. They’re the seed of a  plum-like stone fruit, or drupe; the tree is a very close relative of the plum and  peach. There are several dozen wild or minor species, but the cultivated almond,  Prunus amygdalus,   came from western Asia and had been domesticated by the  Bronze Age. California is now the largest producer. Thanks to their high content of  antioxidant vitamin E and low levels of polyunsaturated fats, almonds have a  relatively long shelf life.  Almonds are the main ingredient in marzipan, a paste of sugar and almonds finely  ground together and molded and dried into decorative shapes, a Middle Eastern  invention that became popular in Europe during the medieval Crusades. Leonardo  da Vinci made marzipan sculptures for the Milanese court of Ludovico Sforza in
1470, and wrote that he “observed with pain that [they] gobble up all the  sculptures I give them, right to the last morsel.” Almond paste is also commonly  used as a pastry filling or the base for macaroons, cookies whose only other  structural ingredient is egg whites.  The almond, a close relative of the peach, plum, and cherry, with its stony shell.  Why   Almonds   Don’t   Taste   Like   Almond   Flavoring   Curiously,   standard  domesticated   almonds   taste   delicately   nutty,   nothing   like   the   strong   and  distinctive flavoring called “almond extract.” Strong almond flavor is found only in  wild or bitter almonds, which are inedibly bitter and toxic. They contain a defensive  system that generates deadly and bitter hydrogen cyanide when the kernel is  damaged (p. 258). It’s estimated that eating a few bitter almonds at a sitting could  kill a child. But it turns out that one by-product of cyanide production is  benzaldehyde, a volatile molecule that is the essence of wild almond flavor, and  that contributes to the aromas of cherry, apricot, plum, and peach. Our safe “sweet”  almond varieties lack both the bitterness and the characteristic aroma.  Almond Extracts and Imitations  The commonest form of bitter-almond flavor is a bottled extract, which contains  aromatic benzaldehyde without the cyanide that accompanies it in the almonds  themselves. “Pure” almond extract is derived from bitter almonds, while “natural”  extract usually contains benzaldehyde produced from cassia bark (p. 424), and  “imitation” extract contains benzaldehyde synthesized from pure chemicals.
Bitter almonds are generally unavailable in the United States, while in Europe  they’re used like a spice, added in small numbers to flavor marzipan made from  sweet almonds, as well as to amaretti cookies, amaretto liqueur, and other dishes.  Apricot   and   peach   kernels   are   readily   available   alternative   sources   of  benzaldehyde, though they don’t have the intense and otherwise fine flavor of  bitter almonds. German cooks make versions of marzipan called   persipan   with  apricot and peach kernels.  Almond Milk and Cream in Medieval Times  Blancmange  Take capons and seeth them, then take them up. Take blanched  almonds, grind them, and mix them with the same broth. Cast this milk  in a pot. Wash rice, and add, and let it seeth. Then take brawn of  capons, tear it small and add. Take lard, sugar and salt, and cast  therein. Let it seeth. Then assemble it and decorate it with aniseed  confected white or red, and with fried almonds, and serve it forth.  —   The Forme of Cury,   ca. 1390  Cream of Almond Milk  Take almond milk, and boil it, and when it is boiled take it from the fire,  and sprinkle on a little vinegar. Then spread it on a cloth, and cast  sugar on it, and when it is cold gather it together, and leche [slice] it in  dishes, and serve it forth.  — From a medieval manuscript, published in R. Warner,  Antiquitates Culinariae , 1791  Brazil Nuts   Brazil nuts are unusually large, an inch/2.5 cm or more long, and  double the weight of almonds and cashews. They’re the seeds of a large tree  ( Bertholletia excelsa,   150 ft/50 m tall, 6 ft/2 m across) native to the Amazon region  of South America, where they develop in groups of 8 to 24 inside a hard,  coconutsized shell. South American countries are still the main producers. The  pods are gathered only after they fall to the ground. Because they weigh about 5
pounds, they can be lethal missiles, and harvesters must carry shields to protect  themselves. The edible portion of the seed is an immensely swollen embryonic  stem. Thanks to their size and high oil content, two large Brazil nuts are the caloric  equivalent of one egg.  Brazil nuts are notable for containing the highest levels of selenium of any food.  Selenium helps to prevent the development of cancer, apparently by several  different means, including an antioxidant enzyme and by inducing damaged cells  to die. However, an overdose is toxic. The World Health Organization recommends  a maximum daily selenium intake corresponding to just a half-oz/14 gm of Brazil  nuts.  Why Brazil Nuts Rise to the Top of the Bowl  A paper published in the 1987   Physical Review Letters   tried to crack a hard nut:  why is it that in a bowl of mixed nuts, the small nuts end up at the bottom and  the Brazil nuts on top? The same kind of segregation by size takes place in  many different mixtures, from corn flakes to the soil. It turns out that objects  in a mixture are pulled downward through gaps in the mixture by gravity —  and small gaps are more common than large gaps, so small objects more  frequently sink than large ones.  Cashews   Like the Brazil nut, cashews come from the Amazon region, whose  natives gave us the name. But the tree was successfully transplanted to India and  East Africa by the Portuguese, and today these regions are the world’s largest  producers. The cashew is second only to the almond in world trade. It’s a relative of  poison ivy, and that’s why we never see cashews for sale in the shell. The shell  contains an irritating oil that must be driven off by heating before the seed can be  carefully extracted without contamination. In the producing countries, the seed-  containing fruit is often discarded in favor of the swollen stem tip or “false fruit”  called the cashew apple, which is enjoyed either fresh, cooked, or fermented into  an alcoholic drink.  Cashews are unusual among oily nuts in containing a significant amount of starch  (around 12% of their weight), which makes them more effective than most nuts at
thickening water-based dishes (soups, stews, Indian milk-based desserts).  Chestnuts   Chestnuts come from several different species of large trees in the  genus   Castanea,   which are found in Europe, Asia, and North America. They’re  unlike the other common nuts in storing their energy for the future seedling in the  form of starch, not oil. Chestnuts are thus usually thoroughly cooked and have a  mealy texture. Since prehistory they have been dried, ground into flour, and used  in the same way that the starchy cereals are, to make gruels, breads, pastas, cakes,  and provide substance in soups. Before the arrival of the potato and corn from the  New World, chestnuts were an essential subsistence food in mountainous and  marginal agricultural areas of Italy and France. At the opposite extreme, a luxurious  chestnut specialty invented in the 17th century is   marrons glacés,   large chestnuts  that are cooked, slowly infused over a day or two with a vanilla-flavored syrup,  then glazed with a more concentrated syrup.  The American enjoyment of our native chestnut,   Castanea dentata,   was brought to  a sad end in the early 20th century, when in the course of a few decades, an  imported Asian fungal blight wiped out a tree that used to make up 25% or more  of the eastern hardwood forest. Today, the world’s leading chestnut producers are  China, Korea, Turkey, and Italy.  Because of its high initial moisture content, the chestnut is quite perishable.  Chestnuts are best kept covered and refrigerated, and should be eaten fairly  quickly. If freshly gathered, however, they should be cured at room temperature for  a few days. This improves the flavor by permitting some starch to be converted  into sugar before the cells’ metabolism is slowed down.  Coconuts   Coconuts are the largest and most important of all nuts. They are the  stone of a drupe, the fruit of   Cocos nucifera,   large (to 100 ft/30 m) tree-like palms  that are more closely related to the grasses than to other nut trees. They’re thought  to have originated in tropical Asia, but their hardy fruits apparently floated to many  parts of the world before humans began to transport them. They were largely  unknown to Europe until the early Middle Ages. About 20 billion nuts are  produced each year, mainly in the Philippines, India, and Indonesia. The word  coconut   comes from the Portuguese   coco,   which means goblin or monkey. The  markings on the stem end of the nut can look uncannily like a face. The tiny  embryo resides under one of the eyes, through which it grows when it sprouts.  Coconuts consist of a thick fibrous fruit layer, the husk, within which is the seed
proper enclosed in a woody shell. The meat and milk constitute the seed’s  endosperm, which   contains   enough   nutrients   and moisture to   support   the  seedling’s growth for more than a year. The entire fruit may weight 2–5 lb/1–2 kg,  of which about a quarter is meat, 15% free water.  The coconut. This massive seed is borne in a thick, dry husk and contains both solid  and liquid endosperm to feed the small embryo, which emerges from one of the three  “eyes” at the end of the shell.  Coconut provides a backbone flavor in many tropical cuisines, from southern India  and Southeast Asia to Africa and South America. It’s often used in the form of  coconut milk, which provides a rich, flavorful liquid in which to cook all kinds of  foods, from meats and fish to vegetables and rice. Since the coconut meat can’t be  roasted intact, its flavor is developed by carefully toasting small flakes or shreds.  Unlike other nuts, which provide crunchiness or smooth richness depending on  how finely they’re broken, coconut has a persistent, chewy texture unless toasted  and kept very dry.  The distinctive sweet, rich aroma of coconut is created by derivatives of saturated  fatty acids called lactones (octa-, deca-, dodeca-, tetradecalactones) — peaches are  also flavored by lactones — while roasting generates more generic nutty notes  (from pyrazines, pyrroles, furans).  Coconut Development   Coconut fruits are borne and mature year-round. At around  four months, the nut fills with liquid; at five, it reaches its full size and begins to  develop a jelly-like meat; at seven its shell begins to harden, and it’s mature at a  year. Immature coconuts, around five to seven months old, offer their own  pleasures: a sweet liquid called coconut water (about 2% sugars); and a moist,
delicate, gelatinous meat that’s mainly water, sugars and other carbohydrates. In  the mature coconut of 11–12 months, the liquid has become less sweet and less  abundant, and the meat has become firm, fatty, and white. The meat is about 45%  water, 35% fat, 10% carbohydrate, 5% protein.  Coconut Meat and Milk   A good fresh coconut should feel heavy and contain  enough liquid to slosh audibly. If coconut meat is pounded in a mortar or ground  finely in a blender, it forms a thick paste consisting of microscopic oil droplets and  cell debris suspended in water, which makes up about half the volume. Coconut  milk is made by mixing the paste with some additional water and straining to  remove the solid particles. Left to stand for an hour, this milk separates into a fat-  rich cream layer and a thin “skim” layer. Coconut milk can also be made from dried  shredded coconut, and is readily available canned.  Coconut “Gelatin”  In addition to products from the seed itself, the coconut palm offers several  other distinctive food materials. One of the more unusual is   nata de coco,   or  “coconut gelatin,” a moist, translucent mass of cellulose produced by a vinegar  bacterium ( Acetobacter xylinum ) on the surface of fermenting coconut water.  It has little flavor of its own and a uniquely crunchy texture. In the Philippines  it’s washed of its vinegary home, flavored, packed in sugar syrup, and eaten as  a sweet.  Coconut Oil   For part of the 20th century, coconut oil was the most important  vegetable oil in the world. It can be produced in large quantities, is very stable, and  has a melting point similar to that of milk fat. But the very quality that makes it  stable and versatile also made it appear to be nutritionally undesirable. The fats  that make up coconut oil are nearly 90% saturated (15% caprylic and capric, 45%  lauric, 18% myristic, 10% palmitic, and just 8% monounsaturated oleic), which  means that they raise blood cholesterol levels. During the 1970s and ’80s,  manufacturers   of   processed   foods   therefore   replaced   coconut   oil   with   less  saturated, partly hydrogenated seed oils — which now turn out to contain  undesirable trans fatty acids (p. 38).
Given our current and broader understanding of other dietary influences on heart  disease (p. 255), there’s no reason not to enjoy the coconut’s riches as part of a  balanced diet that includes plenty of protective fruits, vegetables, and other seeds.  Ginkgo Nuts   Gingko nuts are the starchy kernels of   Ginkgo biloba,   the last survivor  of a tree family that was prominent during the age of the dinosaurs. The nuts are  borne inside fleshy fruits that develop a strong rancid smell when ripe. In Asia, the  tree’s home, the fruits are fermented in vats of water to soften and remove the  pulp, and the seeds are washed, dried, and roasted or boiled, either in-shell or  shelled. The kernel has a distinctive but mild flavor.  Hazelnuts   Hazelnuts come from a few of the 15 species of mainly bushy trees in  the northern-hemisphere genus   Corylus. Corylus avellana   and   C. maxima   are native  to temperate Eurasia and were widely exploited in prehistoric times for their nuts  and rapidly produced shoots, which were used as walking sticks and a surface for  marshy ground. A much taller tree,   C. colurna,   accounts for much of the production  in the Black Sea region of Turkey. Another term for the nut is “filbert,” which in the  United Kingdom is applied to the more elongated varieties, and which may come  from St. Philibert’s Day in late August, when hazelnuts begin to ripen. The late  Roman cookbook of Apicius called for hazelnuts in sauces for birds, boar, and  mullet; they’re an alternative to almonds in Spanish picada and romesco sauces,  and an ingredient in the spicy Egyptian spread called dukka and the Italian liqueur  frangelico. Hazelnuts remain especially popular in Europe, where Turkey, Italy, and  Spain are the main producers. In the United States, nearly all hazelnuts are  produced in Oregon.  The distinctive aroma of hazelnuts comes from a compound dubbed filbertone  (heptenone), which is present in small quantities in the raw nut, but increases 600-  to 800-fold when the nuts are fried or boiled.  Macadamia Nuts   Macadamia nuts are newcomers to the world’s table. They come  from two evergreen tropical trees ( Macadamia tetraphylla   and   M. integrifolia ) native  to northeastern Australia, where the aborigines enjoyed them for thousands of  years before they were noticed and named by Europeans (for John Macadam, a  Scots-born chemist, in 1858). Macadamias were introduced to Hawaii in the 1890s,  and became commercially significant there around 1930. Today Australia and  Hawaii are the main producers, but their output remains relatively small, and  macadamias are therefore among the most expensive nuts. Because their shells are
extremely hard, they are sold almost exclusively out-of-shell, often packed in cans  or bottles to protect them from air and rancidity. Macadamias have the highest fat  content of the tree nuts, and it’s mostly monounsaturated (65% oleic acid). Their  flavor is mild and delicate.  Peanut   This popular nut is not a nut, but the seed of a small leguminous bush,  Arachis hypogaea,   which pushes its thin, woody fruit capsules below ground as  they mature. The peanut was domesticated in South America, probably Brazil,  around 2000   BCE , and was an important crop in Peru before the time of the Incas. In  the 16th century, the Portuguese took it to Africa, India, and Asia, and it soon  became a major source of cooking oil in China (peanuts have double the oil  content of soybeans). It wasn’t until the 19th century that Americans thought of  peanuts as anything but animal feed, and not until the early 20th century that the  remarkable agricultural scientist George Washington Carver encouraged southern  farmers to replace weevil-ravaged cotton with peanuts.  Today India and China are by far the largest peanut producers, with the United  States a distant third. Most Asian peanuts are crushed for oil and meal; in the  United States most are eaten as food. Peanuts are now prominent in several Asian  and African traditions. Pureed, they lend richness, substance, and flavor to sauces  and soups. Whole and pureed peanuts are used in Thai and Chinese noodle dishes,  in sweet bun fillings, in Indonesian dipping sauces and sambal condiments, and in  West African stews, soups, cakes, and confections. A popular snack food in both  Asia and the southern United States is peanuts boiled in salted water. When boiled  in their shells, peanuts develop a potato-like aroma, with sweet vanilla highlights  thanks to the liberation of vanillin from the shell.  In the United States, four varieties are grown for different purposes: large Virginia  and small Valencia for nuts sold in the shell, Virginia and small Spanish for mixed  nuts and candies, and Runner for baked goods and peanut butter, since its higher  content of monounsaturated fat makes it less vulnerable to rancidity.  Peanut Butter   The modern version of peanut butter was apparently developed  around 1890 in St. Louis or in Battle Creek, Michigan. Commercial peanut butter is  made by heating the nuts to an internal temperature around 300ºF/150ºC to  develop flavor, blanching in hot water to remove the skin, and finally grinding  them with about 2% salt and up to 6% sugar. The oil can be prevented from  separating from the solid peanut particles by adding 3–5% of a hydrogenated
shortening that solidifies as the butter cools and forms a host of tiny crystals that  hold the very unsaturated, liquid peanut oil in place. Low-fat peanut butter is  made by replacing a portion of the peanuts with soy protein and with sugar.  Peanut Flavor   Several hundred volatile compounds have been identified in  roasted peanuts. The raw seed has a green, bean-like flavor (mainly from green-leaf  hexanal and the pyrazine that characterizes peas). The roasted aroma is a  composite of several sulfur compounds, a number of generically “nutty” pyrazines,  and others, some of which have fruity, flowery, fried, and smoky characters. During  storage and staling, the nutty pyrazines disappear and painty, cardboard notes  increase.  Peanut Oil   Thanks to the productivity of the peanut plant in warm climates,  peanut oil is an important cooking oil, especially in Asia. It’s made by steaming the  peanuts to inactivate enzymes and soften the cellular structure, then pressing  them; the oil is then clarified and sometimes refined to remove some of the  distinctive flavor and impurities that would lower the smoke point.  Pecans   Pecans are the soft, fatty seeds of a very large tree, a distant relative of the  walnut that is native to the Mississippi and other river valleys of central North  America, and found as far south as Oaxaca.   Carya illinoiensis   is one of about 14  species of hickories, and its nuts among the tastiest and easiest to shell. Wild  pecans were enjoyed by the native Americans, and apparently made into a kind of  milk that was used for drinking, cooking, and possibly fermenting. The earliest  intentional plantings may have been made by the Spanish around 1700 in Mexico,  and a few decades later the trees were grown in the eastern British colonies. The  first improved varieties were made possible in the 1840s by a Louisiana slave  named Antoine, who worked out how to graft wood from superior trees onto  seedling stocks. Georgia, Texas, and New Mexico are now the largest producers of  pecans.  Compared to the walnut, the pecan is more elongated, the cotyledons thicker and  smoother, with a larger proportion of meat to shell. As with walnuts, light-skinned  varieties are less astringent than dark-skinned. The distinctive flavor of pecans  remains somewhat mysterious. In addition to the generic nutty notes of the  pyrazines, one study found a lactone (octalactone) that is also present in coconuts.  Pecans and walnuts are among the nuts with the highest oil and unsaturated fatty  acid contents. High oil content generally goes along with fragile texture, which
means that the kernels are easily bruised, with seepage of oil to the surface and  rapidoxidation and staling. Roasting increases the rate of staling by weakening  cells and allowing oil to come into contact with the air. Carefully handled, raw  pecans can be stored for years in the freezer.  Pine Nuts   Pine nuts are gathered from about a dozen of the 100 species of pines,  one of the most familiar evergreen tree families in the Northern Hemisphere.  Among the more important sources are the Italian stone pine   Pinus pinea,   the  Korean or Chinese pine   P. koraiensis,   and the southwestern U.S. pinyons   P.  monophylla   and   P. edulis.  Pine nuts. They are borne on the scales of pine cones, and like the coconut, are mainly  endosperm tissue rather than cotyledons.  The nuts are borne on the scales of the pine cone, which takes three years to  mature. The cones are sun-dried, threshed to shake out the seeds, and the kernels  then hulled, nowadays by machine. They have a distinctive, resinous aroma and are  rich even for nuts; Asian pine nuts have a higher oil content (78%) than either  American or European types (62% and 45% respectively). They’re used in many  savory and sweet preparations, and pressed to make oil. In Korea, pine pollen is  used to make sweets, and Romanians flavor game sauces with the green cones.  Pistachios   Pistachios are the seeds of a native of arid western Asia and the Middle  East,   Pistacia vera,   a relative of the cashew and the mango. Along with almonds,  they have been found at the sites of Middle Eastern settlements dating to 7000   BCE .  A close relative,   Pistacia lentiscus,   provides the aromatic gum called mastic (p. 421).  Pistachios first became a prominent nut in America in the 1880s, thanks to their
popularity among immigrants in New York City. Iran, Turkey, and California are the  major producers today.  Pistachios grow in clusters, with a thin, tannin-rich hull around the inner shell and  kernel. As the seeds mature, the outer hull turns purple-red and the expanding  kernel cracks the inner shell open. Traditionally, the ripe fruits were knocked from  the trees and sun-dried, and the hull pigments stained the shell, so the shells were  often dyed to make them a uniform red. Today, most California pistachios are  hulled before drying, so the shells are their natural pale tan color.  Pistachios are remarkable among the nuts for having green cotyledons. The color  comes from chlorophyll, which remains vivid when the trees grow in a relatively  cool climate, for example at high elevation, and when the nuts are harvested early,  several weeks before full maturity. Pistachios thus offer not only flavor and texture  but a contrasting color in pâtés, sausages, and other meat dishes, and in ice creams  and sweets. The color is best retained by roasting or otherwise cooking the kernels  at low temperatures that minimize chlorophyll damage.  Walnuts   Walnuts come from trees in the genus   Juglans,   of which there are around  15 species native to southwestern Asia, eastern Asia, and the Americas. The most  widely cultivated is the Persian or English walnut,   Juglans regia,   whose seeds have  been enjoyed since ancient times in western Asia and Europe, and among tree  nuts are second only to almonds in worldwide consumption. In many European  languages, the generic term for nut is also the word for walnut. The United States,  France, and Italy are the major producers today. Walnuts have long been pressed  for their aromatic oil, were once made into milk in Europe and China, and came to  provide the rich, flavorful backbone of sauces in Persia ( fesenjan ), Georgia ( satsivi ),  and Mexico ( nogado ). In some countries, immature “green” walnuts are harvested  in early summer and pickled (England), used to flavor sweetened alcohol (Sicilian  nocino,   French   vin de noix ), or preserved in syrup (the Middle East).  Like its cousins the pecan and hickories, the walnut is the stone of a thin-walled  fruit, the edible portion being two lobed, wrinkled cotyledons. Walnuts are  exceptionally rich in the omega-3 polyunsaturated linolenic acid, which makes  them nutritionally valuable but also especially liable to become rancid; they should  be kept in the cold and dark. The aroma of walnuts is created by a complex mixture  of molecules derived from the oil (aldehydes, alcohols, and ketones).
Food Words:   Pine, Walnut, Flax, Sesame  A number of nut names seem simply to name the nuts, without a penumbra  of related meanings. This is an indication that almonds and pistachios (from  the Greek) and hazelnuts (from the Indo-European) have been basic fare for a  very long time.   Pine   comes from an Indo-European root meaning “to swell, to  be fat,” probably an allusion to the fat-like resin that the tree exudes.   Walnut   is  an Old English compound of   wealh,   meaning “Celt” or “foreigner,” and   hnutu,  “nut,” a reflection of the fact that walnuts were introduced to the British Isles  from the east.   Flax   comes from an Indo-European root meaning “to plait,”  because flax was originally grown for its stem fibers. And   sesame   comes from  two words in the ancient Middle Eastern Akkadian language that meant “oil”  and “plant.”  Walnut Relatives   A North American relative of the Persian walnut, the black  walnut ( J. nigra ) is smaller, with a harder shell and a stronger, distinctive flavor. It  was once commonly used to make breads, confections, and ice creams, but it’s  difficult to extract from the shell in large pieces and has been largely ignored. Most  still come from wild trees in Missouri. Another American species, the butternut ( J.  cinerea ), is even less known, but remarkable for its high protein content — near  30% — and esteemed by enthusiasts as among the tastiest nuts. The Japanese  have an indigenous walnut,   J. ailantifolia,   one of whose varieties is the distinctively  heart-shaped heartnut.  Characteristics of Other Oil-Rich Seeds  Flaxseed   Flaxseed comes from plants native to Eurasia, species of   Linum   and  especially   L. usitatissimum,   which have been used for more than 7,000 years as a  food and to make linen fiber. The small, tough, reddish-brown seed is about 35%  oil and 30% protein, and has a pleasantly nutty flavor and an attractively glossy  appearance. Two qualities set it apart from other edible seeds. First, its oil is over  half linolenic acid, an “omega-3” fatty acid that the body can convert into the  healthful long-chain fatty acids (DHA, EPA) found in seafoods (p. 183). Flax oil (also  known as linseed oil, and valued in manufacturing for drying to a tough water-
resistant layer) is by far the richest source of omega-3 fatty acids among plant  foods. Second, flaxseed is about 30% dietary fiber, a quarter of which is a gum in  the seed coat made up of long chains of various sugars. Thanks to the gum, ground  flaxseed forms a thick gel when mixed with water, is an effective emulsifier and  foam stabilizer, and can improve the volume of baked goods.  Poppy Seeds   Poppy seeds come from a west Asian plant,   Papaver somniferum,  that was cultivated by the ancient Sumerians. It’s the same plant whose immature  seed capsules are cut to collect the latex called opium, a mixture of morphine,  heroin, codeine, and other related alkaloid drugs. The seeds are harvested from the  capsules after the latex flow has stopped. They may carry traces of opiate alkaloids  as well, not enough to have an effect on the body, but enough to cause positive  results in drug tests after the consumption of a poppy-flavored cake or pastry.  Poppy seeds are tiny; it takes 3,300 to make a gram, 90,000 an ounce, 1–2 million a  pound. The seed is 50% oil by weight. Poppy seeds sometimes have a bitter,  peppery taste, the result of damage to the seeds, which mixes oil with enzymes  and generates free fatty acids. The striking blue color of some poppy seeds is  apparently an optical illusion. Microscopic examination demonstrates that the  actual pigment layer of the seed is brown. Two layers above it, however, is a layer of  cells containing tiny crystals of calcium oxalate: and the crystals act like tiny prisms,  refracting light rays in such a way that blue wavelengths are selectively reflected.  Pumpkin Seeds   Pumpkin seeds come from the fruits of the New World native  Cucurbita pepo,   are notable for being deep green with chlorophyll, and for  containing no starch, as much as 50% oil, and 35% protein. Pumpkin seeds are  eaten widely as a snack and in Mexico are used as a sauce thickener. There are  “naked” varieties that lack the usual tough, adherent seed coat and are therefore  much easier to work with.  Pumpkin seed oil is a prominent salad oil in central Europe. The oil, containing  mainly polyunsaturated linoleic and monounsaturated oleic acids, is intriguingly  changeable in color. Pumpkin seeds contain both yellow-orange carotenoid  pigments, mainly lutein, and chlorophyll. Oil pressed from raw seeds is green; but  when the seed meal is wetted and heated to increase the yield, more carotenoids  are extracted than chlorophyll. The result is an oil that looks dark brown in the  bottle or bowl from the combination of orange and green pigments; but in a thin  layer, for example on a piece of bread dipped into the oil, there are fewer pigment
molecules to absorb light, the chlorophyll dominates, and the oil becomes  emerald green.  Sesame Seeds   Sesame seeds are the seeds of   Sesamum indicum,   a plant of the  central African savanna that is now mostly grown in India, China, Mexico, and the  Sudan. Sesame seeds are small, with 250–300 per gram and 7,500–9,000 per  ounce, come in a variety of colors, from golden to brown, violet, and black, and are  about 50% oil by weight. They’re usually lightly toasted (250–300ºF/120–150ºC for  5 minutes) to develop a nutty flavor, which has some sulfur aromatics in common  with roasted coffee (furfurylthiol). Sesame seeds are made into the seasoned  Middle Eastern paste called tahini, are added to rice balls and made into a tofu-like  cake with arrowroot in Japan, and made into a sweet paste in China, as well as  decorating a variety of baked goods in Europe and the United States. Sesame oil is  also extracted from toasted seeds (360–400ºF/180–200ºC for 10–30 minutes) and  used as a flavoring. The oil is remarkable for its resistance to oxidation and  rancidity, which results from high levels of antioxidant phenolic compounds  (lignans), some vitamin E, and products of the browning reactions that occur  during the more thorough toasting.  Sunflower Seeds   The flower of   Helianthus annuus,   the only North American native  to become a significant world crop, is a composite of a hundred or more small  flowers, each of which produces a small fruit like the “seed” of the strawberry, a  single seed contained in a thin hull. The seed is mainly storage cotyledons. The  sunflower originated in the American Southwest, was domesticated in Mexico  nearly 3,500 years before the arrival of European explorers, and brought to Europe  around 1510 as a decorative plant. The first large crops were grown in France and  Bavaria in the 18th century to produce vegetable oil. Today, the world’s leading  producer by far is Russia. Improved Russian oil varieties were grown in North  America during World War II, and sunflower is now one of the top annual oil crops  worldwide. The eating varieties are larger than the oil types, with decoratively  striped hulls that are easily removed. Sunflower seeds are especially rich in  phenolic antioxidants and vitamin E.   Object 9
Cereal Doughs and Batters: Bread, Cakes,  Pastry, Pasta  Bread is the most everyday and familiar of foods, the sturdy staff of life on which  hundreds of generations have leaned for sustenance. It also represents a truly  remarkable discovery, a lively pole on which the young human imagination may  well have vaulted forward in insight and inspiration. For our prehistoric ancestors it  would have been a startling sign of the natural world’s hidden potential for being  transformed, and their own ability to shape natural materials to human desires.  Bread is nothing like the original grain, loose, hard, chalky, and bland! Simply  grinding grains, wetting the particles with water, and dropping the paste on a hot  surface, creates a flavorful, puffy mass, crisp outside and moist within. And raised  bread is even more startling. Let the paste sit for a couple of days, and it comes  alive and grows, inflated from within, and cooks into a bread with a delicately  chambered interior that the human hand could never sculpt. Plain parched grains  and dense gruels provide just as much nourishment, but bread introduced a new  dimension of pleasure and wonder to the mainstays of human life.  Food Words:   Dough, Bread  Dough   comes from an Indo-European root that meant “to form, to build,” and  that also gave us the words   figure, fiction,   and   paradise   (a walled garden). This  derivation suggests the importance to early peoples of dough’s malleability,  its clay-like capacity to be shaped by the human hand. (Cooks have long used  both clay and dough to make containers for cooking other foods, especially  birds, meats, and fish.)  The word   bread   comes from a Germanic root, and originally meant a piece or  bit of a loaf, with   loaf   meaning the leavened, baked substance itself. Over  time,   loaf   came to mean the intact baked mass, and   bread   took over   loaf’   s  original meaning. Otherwise we would now ask for a bread of loaf!
So it was bread that became synonymous with food itself in the lands from  western Asia through Europe, and took a prominent place in religious and secular  rituals (Passover matzoh, Communion bread, wedding cakes). In England, it  provided a foundation for naming social relations. “Lord” comes from the Anglo-  Saxon   hlaford,   “loaf ward,” the master who supplies food; “lady” from   hlaefdige,  “loafkneader,” the person whose retinue produces what her husband distributes;  “companion” and “company” from the late Latin   companio,   or “one who shares  bread.”   The staff of life has also been a mainstay for Western thought.  The Evolution of Bread  Bread’s evolution has been influenced by all the elements that go into its making:  the grains, the machines for milling them, the microbes and chemicals that leaven  the dough, the ovens that bake the loaves, the people who make the bread and  eat it. One consistent theme from ancient times has been the prestige of refined  and enriched versions of this basic sustenance. Bread has become a product  increasingly defined by the use of high-rising bread wheats, the milling of that  wheat into a white flour with little of the grain’s bran or germ, leavening with ever  purer cultures of mild-flavored yeasts, enrichment with ever greater quantities of  fat and sugar. In the 20th century we managed to take refinement and enrichment  to the extreme, and now have industrial breads with little flavor or texture left in  them, and cakes that contain more sugar than flour. In the last couple of decades,  bread lovers have led a rediscovery of the pleasures of simple, less refined breads  freshly baked in old-fashioned brick ovens, and even supermarket breads are  getting more flavorful.  Prehistoric Times  Two prehistoric discoveries laid the foundation for the transformation of grains  into breads and noodles, pastries and cakes. The first was that in addition to being  cooked into a porridge, pastes of crushed grain and water could also be turned  into an interesting solid by cooking them on hot embers or stones: the result was  flatbread. The second was that a paste set aside for a few days would ferment and  become inflated with gases: and such a paste made a softer, lighter, more flavorful  bread, especially when cooked from all sides at once in an enclosed oven.  Flatbreads were a common feature of late Stone Age life in parts of the world
where grains were the chief food in the diet; surviving versions include Middle  Eastern lavash, Greek pita, Indian roti and chapati, all made mainly from wheat but  also other grains, and the Latin American tortilla and North American johnnycake,  both made from maize. Such breads were probably first cooked alongside an open  fire, then on a griddle stone, and some of them much later in beehive-shaped  ovens, which were open at the top and contained both coals and bread; pieces of  dough were slapped onto the inside wall.  Bread wheat, the unique species that can make large, light loaves, had evolved by  8000   BCE   (p. 465), but the earliest archaeological evidence for leavened breads  comes from Egyptian remains of around 4000   BCE . The first raised doughs arose  spontaneously, since yeast spores are ubiquitous in the air and on grain surfaces,  and they readily infect a moist, nutritious grain paste. Bread makers throughout  history have harnessed this natural process by leavening new dough with a  leftover piece in which yeast was already growing, but they’ve also valued less sour  starters, especially the frothy residue from brewing beer; yeast production had  become   a   specialized   profession   in   Egypt   by   300   BCE .   Meanwhile   grinding  equipment progressed from the mortar and pestle to two flat stones and then,  around   800   BCE   in   Mesopotamia,   to   stones   that   could   rotate   continuously.  Continuous milling made feasible the eventual use of animal, water, and wind  power, and thus the grinding of grains into very fine flours with little human labor.  Greece and Rome  Leavened loaves of bread arrived fairly late along the northern rim of the  Mediterranean. Bread wheat was not grown in Greece until about 400   BCE , and flat  barley breads were probably the norm well after. We do know that the Greeks  enjoyed breads and cakes flavored with honey, anise, sesame, and fruits, and that  they made both whole-grain and partly refined breads. At least from the Greeks  on, whiteness in bread was a mark of purity and distinction. Archestratus, a  contemporary of Aristotle and OWNER of the   Gastronomia,   a compendious account  of ancient Mediterranean eating whose title gave us the word “gastronomy,”  accorded extravagant praise to a barley bread from the island of Lesbos on just  these grounds, calling it “bread so white that it outdoes the ethereal snow in  purity. If the celestial gods eat barley bread, no doubt Hermes goes to Eresus to  buy it for them.”
By late Roman times, wheat bread was a central feature of life, and huge amounts  of durum and bread wheats were imported from northern Africa and other parts of  the empire to satisfy the public demand. Pliny offers a touching reminder that  enriched breads — early cakes and pastries — were great luxuries in turbulent  times:  Some people use eggs or milk in kneading the dough, while even butter has  been used by peoples enjoying peace, when attention can be devoted to the  varieties of bakers’ goods.  Food Words:   Flour  While the words for ground grain in French, Italian, and Spanish,   farine   and  farina,   come from the Latin for a kind of grain ( far ), the English word “flour”  arose in medieval times from “flower,” meaning the best part of the ground  grain: that is, the portion left after screening out the large particles of germ  and bran. To a medieval Englishman, “whole wheat flour” would have been a  contradiction in terms!  The Middle Ages  During the European Middle Ages, bakers were specialists, producing either  common brown or luxurious white bread. It wasn’t until the 17th century that  improvements in milling and in per capita income led to the wide availability of  more or less white bread and the dissolution of the brown guild as a separate  body. In northern areas, rye, barley, and oats were more common than wheat and  were made into coarse, heavy breads. One use of flat bread at this time was the  “trencher,” a dense, dry, thick slice that served as a plate at medieval meals and  then was either eaten or given away to the poor. And pastry was often made to  serve as a kind of all-purpose cooking and storage container, a protective and  edible wrapping for meat dishes in particular.
Four stages in the evolution of machines for grinding grain. Clockwise from upper left:  The saddlestone and lever mill were limited by their back-and-forth motion. The  hourglass mill, which could be turned continuously in one direction by man or animal,  was widely used by Roman times. Flat millstones finally made it possible to harness  more elemental forces, and were put to use in water and wind mills. In the modern  industrial world, most grain is milled between grooved metal rollers, but some is still  stone-ground.  Early Modern Times  The late medieval period and Renaissance brought notable progress in the art of  enriched breads; both puff pastry and choux pastry date from this time. Domestic  recipes for bread begin to appear in cookbooks for the emerging middle class, and  already look much like modern recipes. English and American cookbooks from the  18th century on contain dozens of recipes for breads, cakes, and cookies. In  England around 1800, most bread was still baked in domestic or communal village  ovens. But as the Industrial Revolution spread and more of the population moved  to crowded city quarters, the bakeries took over an ever increasing share of bread  production, and some of them adulterated their flour with whiteners (alum) and  fillers (chalk, ground animal bones). The decline of domestic baking was criticized  on economic, nutritional, and even moral grounds. The English political journalist  William Cobbett wrote in   Cottage Economy   (1821), a tract addressed to the working
class, that it is reasonable to buy bread only in cities where space and fuel are in  short supply. Otherwise,  How wasteful, then, and indeed, how shameful, for a labourer’s wife to go to  the baker’s shop…  Give me, for a beautiful sight, a neat and smart woman, heating her oven and  setting in her bread! And, if the bustle does make the sign of labour glisten on her  brow, where is the man that would not kiss that off, rather than lick the plaster  from the cheek of a duchess?  The scolding of Cobbett and others failed to reverse the trend. Bread making was  one of the most time-consuming and laborious of household tasks, a kiss on the  sweaty forehead notwithstanding, and more and more of the work was delegated  to the baker.  Innovations in Leavening   A new method of leavening made its first appearance  in the first American cookbook, Amelia Simmons’s 1796   American Cookery.   Four  recipes, two for cookies and two for gingerbread, call for the use of “pearlash,” a  refined version of potash, which was made by soaking the ash produced when  plant materials are burned, draining off the liquid, and drying it down to  concentrate the substances dissolved in it.  Chemical Leavening and the First American Cookie Recipe  Cookies  One pound sugar boiled slowly in half pint water, scum well and cool,  add two tea spoons pearl ash dissolved in milk, then two and a half  pounds flour, rub in 4 ounces butter, and two large spoons of finely  powdered coriander seed, wet with above; make rolls half an inch thick  and cut to the shape you please; bake fifteen or twenty minutes in a  slack oven — good three weeks.  — Amelia Simmons,   American Cookery,   1796  Pearlash is mostly alkaline potassium carbonate, which reacts with acid ingredients
in doughs to generate carbon dioxide gas. It was the precursor to baking soda and  baking   powders,   which   arrived   between   1830   and   1850.   These   chemical  ingredients made it possible to leaven instantly mixtures that living, slow-growing  yeasts couldn’t very well: such things as fluid cake batters and sweet cookie  doughs. Purified commercial yeast cultures for loaf breads, more predictable and  less acidic than brewer’s yeast, became available from specialist manufacturers  around the turn of the 20th century.  The Decline and Revival Of Traditional Breads  Twentieth-Century Industrialization   The 20th century brought two broad trends  to Europe and North America. One was a decline in the per capita consumption of  plain bread. As incomes rose, people could afford to eat more meat and more  high-sugar, high-fat cakes and pastries. So we now lean less heavily than did our  ancestors on the staff of life. The other trend was the industrialization of bread  making. Today very little bread is made in the home, and with the exception of  countries with a strong tradition of buying fresh bread every day — especially  France, Germany, and Italy — most bread is made in large central factories, not in  small local bakeries. Mechanical aids to breadmaking, powered mixers and others,  began to appear around 1900, and culminated in the 1960s in largely automated  factories that produce bread in a fraction of the usual time. These manufacturing  systems replace biological dough development, the gradual, hours-long leavening  and gluten strengthening of the dough by yeast, with nearly instantaneous,  mechanical and chemical dough development. This production method produces  breads with a soft, cake-like interior, an uncrusty crust, and an uncharacteristic  flavor. They are formulated to remain soft and edible in plastic bags for a week or  more. Industrial breads bear little resemblance to traditional breads.  The Return of Flavor and Texture   Europeans and North Americans began to eat  significantly more bread in the 1980s than they had the decade before. One reason  was the revival of traditional bread making. Small bakeries began to produce  bread using less refined grains and grain mixtures, building flavor with long, slow  fermentation, and baking small batches in brick ovens that produce a dark, crusty  loaf. Another reason was the home cook’s rediscovery of the pleasures of baking  and eating fresh warm bread. The Japanese invention of the bread machine made  it possible for busy home cooks to put all the ingredients into a single chamber,  close the lid, and fill the house with the forgotten aroma of fresh-baked bread.
Breads baked by home cooks and artisans account for a small fraction of the  overall   bread   production   in   England   and   North   America.   But   their   revival  demonstrates that people still enjoy the flavors and textures of freshly made  traditional breads, and this fact has caught the attention of industrial producers.  They have recently developed the “par-baking” system, in which manufacturers  ship partly baked and frozen loaves to supermarkets, where they’re baked again  locally and sold while still crusty and flavorful.  Industrial breads were first “optimized” to make bread-like products at minimum  cost and with maximum shelf life. Finally taste and texture are entering the  calculations, and at least some products are improving.  The Basic Structure of Doughs, Batters, and Their  Products  Wheat flour is strange and wonderful stuff! Mix pretty much any other powdery  ingredient with water and we get a simple, inert paste. But mix some flour with  about half its weight in water, and the combination seems to come alive. At first it  forms a cohesive mass that changes its shape reluctantly. With time and kneading,  reluctance gives way to liveliness, a bouncy responsiveness to pressure that  persists even after the kneader lets go. It’s these qualities of cohesiveness and  liveliness that set wheat doughs apart from other cereal doughs, and that make  possible light, delicate loaves of bread, flaky pastries, and silken pastas.  The various textures of baked goods and pastas are created by the structures of  their doughs and batters. Those structures are composed of three basic elements:  water, the flour’s gluten proteins, and its starch granules. Together, these elements  create an integrated, cohesive mass. That cohesiveness is what gives pasta its  close-textured silkenness. It’s also what makes bread doughs, pastry doughs, and  cake batters divisible into microscopically thin but intact sheets. Breads and cakes  are light and tender because the protein-starch mass is divided up by millions of  tiny bubbles; pastries are flaky and tender because the protein-starch mass is  interrupted by hundreds of thin layers of fat.  We call a mixture of flour and water either a   dough   or a   batter,   depending on the  relative proportions of the two major ingredients. Generally, doughs contain more  flour than water and are stiff enough to be manipulated by hand. All the water is
bound to the gluten proteins and to the surfaces of the starch granules, which are  embedded in the semisolid gluten-water matrix. Batters, on the other hand,  contain more water than flour and are loose enough to pour. Much of the water is  free liquid, and both gluten proteins and starch granules are dispersed in it.  The structure of a dough or batter is temporary. When it’s cooked, the starch  granules absorb water, swell, and create a permanent solid structure from the  original, semisolid or liquid one. In the case of breads and cakes, that solid  structure is a sponge-like network of starch and protein filled with millions of tiny  air pockets. Bakers use the term   crumb   for this network, which constitutes the bulk  of the bread or cake. The outer surface, which usually has a dryer, denser texture, is  the   crust.  With this overview in mind, let’s look more closely at the structural elements of  doughs and batters.  Gluten  Chew on a small piece of dough, and it becomes more compact but persists as a  gum-like, elastic mass, the residue that the Chinese named “the muscle of flour”  and that we call   gluten.   It consists mainly of protein, and includes what may well be  the largest protein molecules to be found in the natural world. These remarkable  molecules are what give wheat dough its liveliness and make raised breads  possible.  Gluten Proteins Form Long Chains That Stick to Each Other   Gluten is a complex  mixture of certain wheat proteins that can’t dissolve in water, but do form  associations with water molecules and with each other. When the proteins are dry,  they’re immobile and inert. When wetted with water, they can change their shape,  move relative to each other, and form and break bonds with each other.  Proteins are long, chain-like molecules built up from smaller molecules called  amino acids (p. 805). Most of the gluten proteins, the gliadins and the glutenins,  are around a thousand amino acids long. The gliadin chains fold onto themselves  in a compact mass, and bond only weakly with each other and with the glutenin  proteins. The glutenins, however, bond with each other in several ways to form an  extensive, tightly knit network.  At each end of the glutenin chain are sulfur-containing amino acids that can form  strong sulfur-sulfur bonds with the same amino acids at the ends of other glutenin
chains. To do this they require the availability of oxidizing agents — oxygen in the  air, certain substances produced by yeasts, or “dough improvers” (p. 529) added by  the flour manufacturer or baker. The long, coiled middle stretch of the glutenin  molecule consists mainly of amino acids that form weaker, temporary bonds  (hydrogen and hydrophobic bonds) with similar amino acids. Glutenin chains thus  link up with each other end-to-end to form super-chains a few hundred glutenins  long, and coiled stretches along their lengths readily form many temporary bonds  with similar stretches along neighboring gluten proteins. The result is an extensive  interconnected network of coiled proteins, the   gluten.  Gluten formation. When flour is mixed with water and made into a dough, glutenin  protein molecules link up end-to-end to form long, composite gluten molecules.  Dough is elastic because the gluten molecules are coiled and have many kinks in  them. When a mass of dough is stretched, the kinks are straightened out, the coils  extended, and the proteins get longer(bottom). When the stretching tension is  released, many of the kinks and coils re-form, the protein mass shortens, and the  dough shrinks back toward its original shape.  Gluten Plasticity and Elasticity   The gluten of the bread wheats is both plastic and  elastic; that is, it will change its shape under pressure, yet it resists the pressure and  moves back toward its original shape when the pressure is removed. Thanks to this  combination of properties, wheat dough can expand to incorporate the carbon  dioxide gas produced by yeast, and yet resists enough that its bubble walls won’t  thin to the breaking point.
Gluten plasticity results from the presence of the gliadin proteins among the  glutenins; because they’re compact, the gliadins act something like ball bearings,  allowing portions of the glutenins to slide past each other without bonding.  Elasticity results from the kinked and coiled structure of the interconnected gluten  proteins. Kneading unfolds and aligns the protein molecules, but there are still  loops and kinks along their lengths. Stretching the dough straightens out these  loops and kinks, but when the pressure is relieved, the molecules tend to revert to  their original kinkiness. In addition, the coiled spring-like structure of individual  proteins can extend and store some of the energy of stretching, but when the  stretching is stopped, the molecules spring back to their compact coiled form. The  visible result of these submicroscopic events: the stretched dough creeps back  toward its original shape.  Food Words:   Gluten  Though Chinese cooks discovered the useful properties of gluten long before  anyone else (p. 468), it was two Italian scientists who brought it to the  attention of Europe. In a posthumously published manual of 1665 on optics,  the Jesuit scholar Francesco Maria Grimaldi noted that durum semolina  dough for pasta contains a thick, sticky substance that dries to a hard, brittle  one. He named this substance   gluten,   using the Latin word for “glue.”   Gluten   in  turn came from an Indo-European root   gel-¸   which gave rise to a number of  words meaning to form into a ball, to make a coagulated lump, to be thick or  sticky: these include   cloud, globe, gluteus, clam, cling,   and   clay.   In 1745,  Giambattista Beccari studied gluten more carefully and noted its similarity to  substances characteristic of animals: that is, he recognized that it is what we  now call a protein.  Gluten Relaxation   Another important characteristic of wheat flour doughs is that  their elasticity relaxes with time. An elastic dough that never relaxed could never  be formed into the many shapes of raised doughs and pastas! In a well developed  dough, the protein molecules have been organized and aligned, and have formed  many weak bonds with each other. Because there are so many of them, these  bonds hold the proteins firmly in place and resist stretching, so a ball of dough is
firm and taut. But because the bonds are weak, the physical tension of the taut ball  shape slowly breaks some of them, and the dough structure gradually relaxes into  a flatter, more malleable mass.  Controlling Gluten Strength   Not all baked goods benefit from a strong, elastic  gluten. It’s desirable in yeasted breads, bagels, and in puff pastry; but it gives an  undesirable toughness to other forms of pastry, to raised cakes, griddle cakes, and  cookies. For tender preparations, bakers intentionally limit the development of  gluten. There are a number of ingredients and techniques by which the baker  controls the gluten strength and consistency of doughs and batters. They include:  •   The kind of flour used. High-protein bread flours produce a strong gluten,  low-protein pastry and cake flours a weak one, durum semolina (for pasta) a  strong but plastic one.  •   The presence in the flour of oxidizing substances — aging and improving  agents — which can increase the end-to-end linking of glutenin molecules  and thus dough strength (p. 529).  •   The water content of the dough, which determines how concentrated the  gluten proteins are, and how extensively they can bond to each other. Little  water gives an incompletely developed gluten and a crumbly texture; a lot  of water gives a less concentrated gluten and a softer, moister dough and  bread.  •   Stirring and kneading the flour-water mixture, actions that stretch and  organize the gluten proteins into an elastic network.  •   Salt, which greatly strengthens the gluten network. The electrically positive  sodium and negative chlorine ions cluster around the few charged portions  of the glutenin proteins, prevent those charged portions from repelling each  other, and so allow the proteins to come closer to each other and bond more  extensively.  •   Sugar, which at the concentrations typical of raised sweet breads, 10% or  more of the flour weight, limits the development of gluten by diluting the  flour proteins.  •   Fats and oils, which weaken gluten by bonding to the hydrophobic amino  acids along the protein chains and so preventing them from bonding to  each other.  •   Acidity in the dough — as from a sourdough culture — which weakens the  gluten network by increasing the number of positively charged amino acids
along the protein chains, and increasing the repulsive forces between chains.  Ingredients That Contribute to the Structure of Doughs,  Batters, and Their Products  Ingredient  Kind of  Material   Behavior  Main Effects on  Structure  Flour  Glutenin   Protein   Forms interconnected  gluten network  Makes dough elastic  Gliadin   Protein   Bonds weakly to glutenin  network  Makes dough plastic  Starch   Carbo-  hydrate  Fills gluten network,  absorbs water during  cooking  Tenderizes dough,  sets structure  during baking  Water   Allows gluten network to  form; dilutes it  Small and large  amounts produce  tender products  Yeast,  leavenings  Live cells,  purified  chemicals  Produce carbon dioxide  gas in doughs and batters  Lighten and  tenderize products  Salt   Purified  mineral  Tightens gluten network   Makes dough more  elastic  Fats, oils,  shortenings  Lipids   Weaken gluten network   Tenderize products  Sugar   Carbohy-  drate  Weakens gluten network,  absorbs moisture  Tenderizes  products, preserves  moistness
Ingredient  Kind of  Material   Behavior  Main Effects on  Structure  Eggs   Proteins; fats  and  emulsifiers  (yolk only)  Proteins coagulate during  cooking; fats and  emulsifiers weaken  gluten network;  emulsifiers stabilize  bubbles and starch  Supplement gluten  structure with  tender protein  coagulum; tenderize  products; slow  staling  Milk;  buttermilk  Proteins,  fats;  emulsifiers,  acidity  Proteins, fats, emulsifiers,  acidity weaken gluten  network; emulsifiers  stabilize bubbles and  starch  Tenderize products;  slow staling  Starch  The elastic gluten proteins are essential to the making of raised breads. But  proteins account for only about 10% of flour weight, while about 70% is starch.  Starch granules serve several functions in doughs and batters. Together with the  water they hold on their surfaces, they make up more than half the volume of the  dough, inter-penetrate the gluten network and break it up, and so tenderize it. In  the case of cakes, starch is the major structural material, the gluten being too  dispersed in the large amount of water and sugar to contribute solidity. During the  baking of bread and cakes, the starch granules absorb water, swell, and set to form  the rigid bulk of the walls that surround the bubbles of carbon dioxide. At the  same time their swollen rigidity stops the expansion of the bubbles and so forces  the water vapor inside to pop the bubbles and escape, turning the foam of  separate bubbles into a continuous spongy network of connected holes. If this  didn’t happen, then at the end of baking the cooling water vapor would contract  and cause the bread or cake to collapse.
Food Words:   Starch  As far back as the Romans, purified starch has been incorporated into paper  to give it body and smooth its surface. In the 14th century, Holland and other  northern European countries began stiffening their linen cloth with wheat  starch. The word   starch   dates from the 15th century, and comes from a  German root that means “to stiffen, to make rigid,” which is also what starch  does to convert bread dough into bread. The German in turn came from an  Indo-European root meaning “stiff”; related words are   stare, stark, stern,   and  starve   (which results in the rigidity of death).  Gas Bubbles  Gas bubbles are what make leavened doughs and batters light and tender. Breads  and cakes are aerated to the point that as much as 80% of their volume is empty  space! Gas bubbles interrupt and therefore weaken the network of gluten and  starch granules, dividing it into millions of very thin, delicate sheets that form the  bubble walls.  Bakers use yeasts or chemical leavenings to fill their products with gas bubbles (p.  531). However, these ingredients don’t create new bubbles: their carbon dioxide is  released into the water phase of the dough or batter, and diffuses into and  enlarges whatever tiny bubbles are already there. These primordial bubbles are air  bubbles, and are created when the baker first kneads a dough, or creams butter  and sugar, or whips eggs. The initial aeration of doughs and batters thus strongly  influences the final texture of baked goods. The more bubbles produced during  the preparation of a dough or batter, the finer and tenderer the result.
A close-up view of bread dough. The dense mass of gluten and starch is divided and  tenderized by gas bubbles.  Fats:   Shortening  Since the early 19th century, the term   shortening   has been used to mean fats or  oils that “shorten” a dough, or weaken its structure and thus make the final product  more tender or flaky. This role is most evident in pie crusts and puff pastry (p. 561),  where layers of solid fat separate thin layers of dough from each other so that they  cook into separate layers of pastry. It’s less evident but also important in cakes and  enriched breads, where fat and oil molecules bond to parts of the gluten protein  coils and prevent the proteins from forming a strong gluten. To make a rich bread  with a strong gluten (e.g. Italian panettone, p. 546), the baker mixes the flour and  water alone, kneads the mix to develop the gluten, and only then works in the fat.  Fats and related substances also play an important but indirect role in the  formation of the cooked structure of breads and cakes, where the addition of small  quantities significantly increases volume and textural lightness (p. 530).
Doughs and Batters: Representative Compositions  The numbers shown indicate the relative weights of ingredients in doughs  and batters, with the weight of flour constant at 100. This chart is meant to  give only a general idea of the proportions used in common baked foods;  individual recipes vary widely.  Flour  Total  Water  Fat or  Oil  Milk  Solids   Eggs   Sugar   Salt  Doughs  Bread   100   65   3   3   0   5   2  Biscuit   100   70   15   6   0   1   2  Pastry   100   30   65   0   0   1   1  Cookie   100   20   40   3   6   45   1  Pasta   100   25   0   0   5   0   1  Brioche   100   60   45   2   75   3   1  Panettone   100   40   27   1   15*   28   1  Batters  Pancake, waffle   100   150-  200  20   10   60   10   2  Crepe, popover   100   230   0   15   60   0   2  Choux   100   200   100   -   130   -   2  Sponge cake   100   75   0   0   100   100   1  Pound cake   100   80   50   4   50   100   2  Layer cake   100   130   40   7   50   130   3  Chiffon cake   100   150   40   0   140   130   2  Angel cake   100   220   0   0   250**   45   3  * yolks only  ** whites only
Dough and Batter Ingredients: Wheat Flours  Though other grains and seeds can also be used, most familiar baked goods and  pastas are made from wheat.  Kinds of Wheat  Several kinds of wheat are grown today, each with its own characteristics and uses  (see box, p. 527). Most are species of bread wheat,   Triticum aestivum.   Their most  important distinguishing characteristic   is the content and quality of gluten  proteins, with high protein content and strong gluten often coinciding with a hard,  glassy, translucent grain interior.   Hard   wheat grains constitute about 75% of the  American crop.   Soft   wheats, which make up 20% of the crop, have a lower amount  of   somewhat   weaker   gluten   proteins.   Club   wheat   is   a   distinct   species,   T.  compactum,   whose proteins form an especially weak gluten. Durum wheat is  another distinct species ( T. turgidum durum,   p. 465) used mainly to make pasta (p.  571).  Major Wheat Types  Protein Content ,  % by Weight   Use  Hard red spring wheat   13–16.5   Bread flours  Hard red winter wheat   10–13.5   All-purpose flours  Soft red wheat   9–11   All-purpose, pastry flours  Hard white wheat   10–12   Specialty whole-grain flours  Soft white wheat   10–11   Specialty whole-grain flours  Club wheat   8–9   Cake flours  Durum wheat   12–16   Semolina for dried pasta  In addition to their classification by protein content, North American wheats are  named by their growth habit and kernel color. Spring wheats (including durum)
are sown in the spring and harvested in the fall, while winter wheats are sown in  late fall, live through the winter as a seedling, and are harvested in the summer.  The most common wheat varieties are   red,   their seed coat reddish brown with  phenolic compounds.   White   wheats, with a much lower phenolic content and a  light tan seed coat, are becoming increasingly popular for the light color and less  astringent “sweet” taste of their whole-wheat flours and products containing part  or all of the bran.  Turning Wheat into Flour  The baking qualities of a particular flour are determined by the wheat from which  it’s made, and how that wheat is turned into flour.  Wheat grain and flour. Left : The wheat kernel before milling. Its actual length is about  a quarter of an inch/6 mm. Upper right : Soft wheat flour. The protein in this kind of  wheat comes in thin, weak sections interrupted by starch granules and air pockets.  When milled, it produces small, fine particles. Soft flour makes a weak gluten and is  preferred for tender pastries and cakes. Lower right : Hard wheat flour. The protein  matrix in hard wheat endosperm is strong enough to break off in chunks during  milling. Hard flours make strong gluten and are preferred for most bread making.  Milling: Conventional and Stone Grinding   Milling is the process of breaking the  wheat kernel down into small particles, and sifting the particles to make a flour of  the desired qualities. Most flours are   refined : that is, they have been sieved to  remove the germ and bran layers from the particles of protein-and starch-rich  endosperm. Bran and germ are rich in nutrients and flavor, but they go rancid in a
few weeks, and interfere physically and chemically with the formation of a  continuous, strong gluten; so whole-grain flours make denser, darker breads and  pastries. In conventional milling, grooved metal rollers shear open the grain,  squeeze out the germ, and scrape the endosperm away to be ground, sieved, and  reground until the particles reach the desired size. Stone grinding, which is much  rarer, crushes the whole grain more thoroughly before sieving, so that some of the  germ and bran end up in even the refined flours. Stone-ground flour is therefore  more flavorful than conventionally milled flour, but also has a shorter shelf-life.  Extraction Rates  The degree to which a flour has been refined is designated by the “extraction  rate,” or the percentage of the whole grain remaining in the finished flour.  Whole wheat flour has an extraction rate of 90%. Most commercial white  flours contain between 70 and 72% of the whole grain; French bread flour  ranges from 72 to 78%, and so carries more flavor of the whole grain. Home  bakers can make their own higher-extraction refined flours by supplementing  commercial white flour with a portion of whole wheat flour that they have  sifted to remove coarse bran and germ particles.  Improving and Bleaching   Bakers have known for a long time that freshly milled  flour makes a weak gluten, a slack dough, and a dense loaf. As the flour ages for a  few weeks in contact with the air, its gluten and baking properties improve. We  understand now that oxygen in the air gradually frees the glutenin proteins’ end  sulfur groups to react with each other and form ever longer gluten chains that give  the dough greater elasticity. Beginning around 1900, millers began to save time,  space, and money by supplementing freshly milled flour with oxidizing chlorine  gas and then with potassium bromate. However, worries about the potential  toxicity of bromate residues in the late 1980s led most millers to replace bromate  with ascorbic acid (vitamin C) or azodicarbonamide. (Ascorbic acid itself is an  antioxidant, but becomes oxidized to dehydroascorbic acid, which in turn oxidizes  the gluten proteins.) In Europe, fava bean flour and soy flour have been used as  flour improvers; their active fat-oxidizing enzymes, which generate the typical  beany flavor, also indirectly cause the oxidation and elongation of gluten proteins.
The traditional air-aging of flour had a visible side effect: the yellowish flour  becomes progressively paler as the xanthophyll pigments are oxidized to a  colorless form. Once the chemistry of this change was understood, millers began  using bleaching agents (azodicarbonamide, peroxide) to whiten flours. Many  bakers prefer to use unbleached flours because they have been subjected to less  chemical alteration. Bleaching is not allowed in Europe.  Minor Flour Components  The gluten proteins and starch granules in flour account for about 90% of flour  weight, and for much of the behavior of flour doughs and batters. But some minor  components have an important influence.  Fats and Related Molecules   Although white flour is only about 1% fats, fat  fragments, and phospholipids by weight, these substances are essential to the  development of a well-raised bread. There’s evidence that some fatty materials can  help stabilize the dough bubble walls as they expand and prevent premature  rupture and collapse. Others become attached to starch granules and help soften  the bread structure and slow staling. Similar ingredients added by the cook or  manufacturer can magnify these useful effects (p. 524).  Enzymes   Since the flour’s normal endowment of sugars is enough to feed yeast  cells for only a short period of time, flour manufacturers have long supplemented  the ground wheat with malted wheat or barley: grains that have been allowed to  sprout and develop the enzymes that break down starch to sugars. Because malt  flours give a dark cast to flours and doughs, and because their activity is somewhat  variable, manufacturers are increasingly replacing them with enzymes extracted  and purified from microscopic molds (“fungal amylase”).  Kinds of Flour  Though manufacturers and professional bakers can obtain flours from particular  wheats, most flours for sale in supermarkets are labeled according to their  intended use, with no direct indication of the kind of wheat or wheats they contain  — they’re usually a blend — or their protein content or quality. Flour compositions  can vary significantly from region to region; “all-purpose” flour in much of the  United States and Canada has a higher protein content than “all-purpose” flours in  the   South   or   Pacific   Northwest.   Not   surprisingly,   recipes   developed   with   a
particular flour often turn out very differently when made with another, unless  care is taken to find a replacement that closely approximates the original. The box  on p. 530 lists the compositions of common wheat flours.  Whole wheat flours are high in protein, but a significant fraction of that protein  comes from the germ and aleurone layer and does not form gluten; and germ and  bran particles interfere with gluten formation. They therefore tend to make dense  but flavorful breads. Bread flours are high in strong gluten proteins, and give the  lightest, highest, and chewiest loaf breads. Both pastry and cake flours have low  levels of weak gluten protein for making tender baked goods. Cake flour is  distinctive because it’s treated with chlorine dioxide or chlorine gas. This treatment  has several effects on the starch granules that are useful in cake making (p. 555),  and leaves a trace of hydrochloric acid in the flour, which gives batters and doughs  an acid pH and slightly acid taste.  “Self-rising” flours are flours that contain baking powder (1½ teaspoons baking  powder per cup flour/5–7 gm per 100 g), and therefore don’t require added  leavening for the making of quickbreads, pancakes, and other chemically raised  foods. “Instant” or “instantized” flours (two brand names are Shake & Blend and  Wondra) are low-protein flours whose starch granules have been precooked until  they gelate, then dried again. The precooking and drying make it easier for water  to penetrate them again during cooking. Instant flours are well suited to tender  pastries and last-minute thickening of sauces and gravies.  The Protein Contents of Common Wheat Flours  These figures are approximate, and assume that the flour contains 12%  moisture. The bulk of flour weight, from 70 to 80%, is starch and other seed  carbohydrates. High-protein flours absorb substantially more water than low-  protein flours, and so will produce stiffer doughs with the same proportion of  water.  Flour  Protein  Content  Whole wheat, graham   11–15
Flour  Protein  Content  Durum semolina   13  Bread   12–13  All-purpose (U.S. national brands)   11–12  All-purpose (U.S. regional brands, South, Pacific  Northwest)  7.5–9.5  Pastry   8–9  Cake   7–8  0 or 00 (Italian soft wheat)   11–12  Type 55 (French blend of soft and hard wheat)   9–10  English plain   7–10  Vital gluten   70–85  Because different flours have not only different protein contents, but different  protein qualities, it’s not really possible to turn all-purpose flour into pastry  flour or vice versa. However, it’s possible to dilute the gluten proteins of a  given flour by the addition of cornstarch or another pure starch, or strengthen  them by adding powdered vital gluten. To approximate pastry flour with all-  purpose, add one part by weight of starch to two parts of all-purpose flour; to  approximate all-purpose flour with pastry flour, add one-quarter part of  gluten to two parts of pastry flour. (Purified gluten loses a little less than half  its strength in the drying process.) With its chlorine-altered starch and fats,  cake flour is inimitable.
Dough and Batter Ingredients: Yeasts and Chemical  Leavenings  Leavenings are the ingredients that fill doughs and batters with bubbles of gas,  thus reducing the amount of solid material in a given volume and making the  bread or cake less dense, more light and tender.  Yeasts  Humans have been eating raised breads for 6,000 years, but it wasn’t until the  investigations of Louis Pasteur 150 years ago that we began to understand the  nature of the leavening process. The key is the gas-producing metabolism of a  particular class of fungus, the yeasts. The word “yeast,” however, is as old as the  language, and first meant the froth or sediment of a fermenting liquid that could  be used to leaven bread.  Food Words:   Leavening   and   Yeast  Leavening   comes from an Indo-European root meaning “light, having little  weight.” Related words from the same root include   levity, lever, relieve,   and  lung. Yeast   comes from a root word that meant “to seethe, boil, bubble over.”  This derivation underlines the way in which fermentation seemed to be a kind  of cooking of the cereal gruel, a transformation from within.  The   yeasts   are   a   group   of   microscopic   single-celled   fungi,   relatives   of   the  mushrooms. More than 100 different species are known. Some cause human  infections, some contribute to food spoilage, but one species in particular —  Saccharomyces cerevisiae,   whose name means “brewer’s sugar fungus” — is put to  good use in both brewing and baking. For much of human history, yeast was  simply recruited from the grain surface or supplied by an earlier piece of dough, or  obtained from the surface of beer brewing vats. Today strains especially selected  for breadmaking are grown on molasses in industrial fermentation tanks.  Yeast Metabolism   Yeasts metabolize sugars for energy, and produce carbon
dioxide gas and alcohol as by-products of that metabolism. The overall equation  for the conversion that takes place in yeast cells is this:  C 6 H 12 O 6   2C →   2 H 5 OH + 2CO 2   (1 molecule of glucose sugar yields 2  molecules of alcohol plus 2 molecules of carbon dioxide)  In making beer and wine, the carbon dioxide escapes from the fermenting liquid,  and alcohol accumulates. In making bread, both carbon dioxide and alcohol are  trapped by the dough, and both are expelled from the dough by the heat of  baking.  In an unsweetened dough, yeasts grow on the single-unit sugars glucose and  fructose and on the double-glucose sugar maltose, which enzymes in the flour  produce from broken starch granules. A small amount of added table sugar in a  dough will increase yeast activity, while a large amount decreases it (see sweet  breads, p. 546), as does added salt. Yeast activity is also strongly affected by  temperature: the cells grow and produce gas most rapidly at about 95ºF/35ºC.  In addition to providing carbon dioxide gas to inflate the dough, yeasts release a  number of chemicals that affect the dough consistency. The overall effect is to  strengthen the gluten and improve its elasticity.  Forms of Baker’s Yeast   Commercial yeast is sold to home and restaurant cooks in  three common forms, each a different genetic strain of   S. cerevisiae   with different  traits.  •   Cake or compressed yeast is a moist block of fresh yeast cells, direct from the  fermentation vat. Its cells are alive, and produce more leavening gas than the  other forms. Cake yeast is perishable, must be kept refrigerated, and has a  brief shelf life of one to two weeks.  •   Active dry yeast, which was introduced in the 1920s, has been removed from  the fermentation tank and dried into granules with a protective coating of  yeast debris. The yeast cells are dormant and can be stored at room  temperature for months. The cook reactivates them by soaking them in  warm water, 105–110ºF/ 41–43ºC, before mixing the dough. At cooler  soaking temperatures, the yeast cells recover poorly and release substances  that interfere with gluten formation (glutathione).  •   Instant dry yeast, an innovation of the 1970s, is dried more quickly than  active dry yeast, and in the form of small porous rods that take up water
more rapidly than granules. Instant yeast doesn’t need to be prehydrated  before mixing with other dough ingredients, and produces carbon dioxide  more vigorously than active dry yeast.  An Unusual Chemical Leavening: Hartshorn  The leavening that doesn’t involve an acid-base reaction is ammonium salts  — ammonium carbonate and/or carbamate — which were once known as  “hartshorn” because they were produced by the distillation of deer antlers.  (Hartshorn was also a common source of gelatin.) When these compounds are  heated to 140ºF/60ºC, they decompose into two leavening gases, carbon  dioxide and ammonia, and don’t produce water. They’re especially suited to  thin, very dry cookies and crackers with a large surface area to release the  pungent ammonia during baking.  Baking Powders and Other Chemical Leaveners  Yeast cells produce carbon dioxide slowly, over the course of an hour or more, so  the material surrounding them must be elastic enough to contain it for that much  time. Weak doughs and runny batters can’t hold gas bubbles for more than a few  minutes, and are therefore usually raised with a faster-acting gas source. This is the  role played by chemical leavenings. These ingredients are concentrated, and small  differences in the amount added can cause large variations in the quality of the  finished food. Too little leavening will leave it flat and dense, while too much will  cause the batter to overexpand and collapse into a coarse structure with a harsh  flavor.  Nearly all chemical leavenings exploit a reaction between certain acidic and  alkaline compounds that results in the production of carbon dioxide, the same gas  produced by yeast. The first chemical leavening was a dried water extract of wood  ash — potash, mainly potassium carbonate — which reacts with the lactic acid in a  soured dough as follows:  2(C 3 H 6 O 3 ) + K 2 CO 3   2(KC →   3 H 5 O 3 )+ H 2 O + CO 2   (2 molecules of lactic acid
plus 1 of potassium carbonate yield 2 molecules of potassium lactate,  plus a molecule of water, plus a molecule of carbon dioxide)  The Acid Components of Baking Powders  Some of these acids are available only to manufacturers. Most double-acting  supermarket baking powders are a mixture of sodium bicarbonate, MCP, and  SAS. Single-acting powders omit the SAS, and the MCP is coated to delay its  release artificially.  Leavening Acid   Time of Reaction  Cream of tartar, tartaric acid   Immediately, during mixing  Monocalcium phosphate (MCP)   Immediately, during mixing  Sodium aluminum pyrophosphate (SAPP)   Slow release after mixing  Sodium aluminum sulfate (SAS)   Slow release and heat-activated  Sodium aluminum phosphate (SALP)   Heat-activated, early in cooking  (100–104ºF/38–40ºC)  Dimagnesium phosphate (DMP)   Heat-activated, early in cooking  (104–111ºF/40–44ºC)  Dicalcium phosphate dihydrate (DCPD)   Heat-activated, late in cooking  (135–140ºF/57–60ºC)  Baking Soda   The most common alkaline component of chemical leavenings is  sodium bicarbonate (or sodium acid carbonate, NaHCO 3 ), usually called baking  soda.  Baking soda can be the sole added leavening if the dough or batter contains acids  to react with it. Common acid ingredients include sourdough cultures, fermented  milks (buttermilk, yogurt), brown sugar and molasses, chocolate, and cocoa (if not  dutched, p. 705), as well as fruit juices and vinegar. A general rule of thumb: ½  teaspoon/2 gm baking soda is neutralized by 1 cup/240 ml of fermented milk, or 1  teaspoon/5ml of lemon juice or vinegar, or ¼ teaspoons/5 gm cream of tartar.
Baking Powders   Baking powders are complete leavening systems: they contain  both alkaline baking soda and an acid in the form of solid crystals. (The active  ingredients are mixed with ground dry starch, which prevents premature reactions  in humid air by absorbing moisture, and gives the powder more bulk so that it’s  easier to measure.) When added to liquid ingredients, the baking soda dissolves  almost immediately. If the acid is very soluble, it too will dissolve quickly during  mixing and react with the soda to inflate an initial set of gas bubbles. Cream of  tartar, for example, releases two-thirds of its leavening potential during two  minutes of mixing. If the acid is   not   very soluble, then it will remain in crystal form  for a characteristic length of time, or until cooking raises the temperature high  enough to dissolve it — and then it reacts with the soda to produce a delayed  burst of gas. There are several different acids used in baking powders, each with a  different pattern of gas production (see box, p. 533).  Most supermarket baking powders are “double-acting”; that is, they inflate an  initial set of gas bubbles upon mixing the powder into the batter, and then a  second   set   during   the   baking   process.   Baking   powders   for   restaurant   and  manufacturing production contain slow-release acids so that leavening power  doesn’t dissipate while the batter sits before being cooked.  Chemical leavenings can have adverse effects on both flavor and color. Some  leavening acids have a distinctly astringent taste (sulfates, pyrophosphates). When  acid and base are properly matched, neither is left behind in excess. But when too  much soda is added, or when the batter is poorly mixed and not all the powder  dissolves, a bitter, soapy, or “chemical” flavor results. Colors are also affected in  even slightly alkaline conditions: browning reactions are enhanced, chocolate  turns reddish, and blueberries turn green.  Breads  There are four basic steps in the making of yeast bread. We mix together the flour,  water, yeast, and salt; we knead the mixture to develop the gluten network; we  give the yeast time to produce carbon dioxide and fill the dough with gas cells;  and we bake the dough to set its structure and generate flavor. In practice, each  step involves choices that affect the qualities of the finished loaf. There are many  ways to make basic bread! The following paragraphs explain some of the more  significant choices and their effects. Breads made with special ingredients or
methods — sourdoughs, sweet breads, flatbreads — are described later.  The Choice of Ingredients  Bread making begins with the ingredients, especially the flour and the yeasts.  Because proportions are important, and the weight of a given volume of flour can  vary by as much as 50% depending on whether it has been fluffed up (sifted) or  packed down, it’s best to weigh ingredients rather than measure them in cups.  Flour   The texture and flavor of bread are strongly influenced by the kind of flour  used. “Bread flours” are milled from high-protein wheats, require a long kneading  period to develop their strong gluten, and produce well-raised loaves with a  distinctive, slightly eggy flavor and chewy texture. Lower-protein “all-purpose”  flours give breads with a lower maximum volume, more neutral flavor, and less  chewy texture, while flours from soft wheats with weak gluten proteins make  denser loaves with a tender, cake-like crumb. The more of the outer aleurone, bran,  and germ that makes it into the flour, the darker and denser the bread and the  stronger the whole-grain flavor. The baker can mix different flours to obtain a  particular character. Many artisan breadmakers prefer flours with a moderate  protein content, 11–12%, and an extraction rate somewhere between standard  white and whole wheat flours.  Durum Breads  Durum wheat flour forms an inelastic dough that doesn’t rise well, but has  nevertheless been used to make dense, distinctively flavored, golden breads  in the Mediterranean region for thousands of years. Durum flour absorbs  nearly 50% more water than bread flour does, a fact that is part of the reason  for the longer shelf life of durum bread.  Water   The chemical composition of the water used to make the dough influences  the dough’s qualities. Distinctly acid water weakens the gluten network, while a  somewhat alkaline water strengthens it. Hard water will produce a firmer dough  thanks to the cross-linking effects of calcium and magnesium. The proportion of
water also influences dough consistency. The standard proportion for a firm bread  dough capable of good aeration is 65 parts water to 100 parts all-purpose flour by  weight (40% of the combined weight). Less water will produce a firmer, less  extensible dough and a denser loaf, while more water produces a soft, less elastic  dough and an open-textured loaf. Wet doughs that are barely kneadable — for  example the Italian   cia-batta   — may be 80 parts water or more per 100 flour (45%).  High-protein flours absorb as much as a third more water than all-purpose flours,  so water proportions and corresponding textures also depend on the nature of the  flour used.  Salt   Though some traditional breads are made without salt, most include it, and  not just for a balanced taste. At 1.5–2% of the flour weight, salt tightens the gluten  network and improves the volume of the finished loaf. (The tightening is especially  evident in the autolyse mixing method, below.) Unrefined sea salts that contain  calcium   and   magnesium   impurities   may   produce   the   additional   gluten  strengthening that mineral-rich hard water does. In sourdoughs, salt also helps  limit the protein-digesting activity of the souring bacteria, which can otherwise  damage the gluten.  Yeast   The baker can incorporate yeast in very different forms and proportions. For  a simple dough to be fully leavened and baked in a few hours, the standard  proportion for cake yeast is 0.5–4% of the flour weight, or 2.5–20 gm per  pound/500 gm flour; for dried yeast, approximately half these numbers. If the  dough is to be fermented slowly overnight, only 0.25% of flour weight, barely a  gram per pound/500 gm is needed. (One gram still contains millions of yeast cells.)  As a general rule, the less prepared yeast goes into the dough, and the longer  dough is allowed to rise, the better the flavor of the finished bread. This is because  the concentrated yeast has its own somewhat harsh flavor, and because the  process of fermentation generates a variety of desirable flavor compounds (p. 543).  Starters   A   general   method   for   incorporating   yeast   into   bread   dough   that  maximizes the effective fermentation time and flavor production is the use of   pre-  ferments   or   starters,   portions of already fermenting dough or batter that are added  to the new mass of flour and water. The starter may be a piece of dough saved  from the previous batch, or a stiff dough or runny batter made up with a small  amount of fresh yeast and allowed to ferment for some hours, or a culture of “wild”  yeasts and bacteria obtained without any commercial yeast at all. This last is called  a “sourdough” starter because it includes large numbers of acid-forming bacteria.
Starters go by many names — French   poolish,   Italian   biga,   Belgian   desem,   English  sponge   — and develop different qualities that depend on ingredient proportions,  fermentation   times   and   temperatures,   and   other   details   of   their   making.  Sourdough breads are described on p. 544.  Preparing The Dough: Mixing and Kneading  Mixing   The first step in making bread is to mix the ingredients together. The  moment flour meets water, several processes begin. Broken starch granules absorb  water, and enzymes digest their exposed starch into sugars. The yeast cells feed on  the sugars, producing carbon dioxide and alcohol. The glutenin proteins absorb  some water and sprawl out into their elongated coils; the coils of neighboring  molecules form many weak bonds with each other and thus form the first strands  of gluten. We see the dough take on a vaguely fibrous appearance, and feel it  cohere to itself. When it’s stirred with a spoon, the protein aggregates are drawn  together into visible filaments and form what has been vividly described as a  “shaggy mass.” At the same time, a number of substances in the flour cause breaks  in and blocking of the end-to-end bonds of the gluten molecules, and so an initial  shortening of the gluten chains. As oxygen from the air and oxidizing compounds  from the yeasts enter the dough, the breaking and blocking stop, and the gluten  molecules begin to bond end-to-end and form long chains.  Mixing can be done by hand, in a stand mixer, or in a food processor. The processor  works in less than a minute, a fraction of the time required for hand or mixer  kneading, and therefore offers the advantage of minimizing exposure to air and  oxygen, an excess of which bleaches the remaining wheat pigments and alters  flavor. The high energy input heats the dough, which should be allowed to cool  before fermentation.  Two-Stage Mixing: Autolysis  An alternative to mixing all the dough ingredients at once is the   autolyse   or  “autolysis” method championed by a legendary French bread OWNERity,  Raymond Calvel, to compensate for some of the disadvantages of rapid  industrial production. It has also been adopted by many artisan bakers.
Autolysis involves combining only the flour and water and letting them sit for  15–30 minutes before adding the leavening and salt. According to Calvel, this  initial preparation gives the starch and the gluten proteins a chance to absorb  as much water as possible without the interference of salt, and allows the  gluten chains to shorten more ( autolysis   means “self-digestion”). The result is a  dough that’s easier to manipulate, requires less kneading and therefore less  exposure to oxygen, and so better retains the wheat’s light golden color and  characteristic taste.  Dough Development: Kneading   Once the ingredients have been mixed and the  dough is formed, the process of dough development begins. Whether the dough is  kneaded by hand or in an electrical mixer, it undergoes a similar kind of physical  manipulation: it is stretched, folded over, compressed, stretched, folded, and  compressed many times. This manipulation strengthens the gluten network. It  unfolds the proteins further, orients them side by side and encourages the  development of many weak bonds between neighbors. The glutenin molecules  also form strong end-to-end bonds with each other and thus a cohering network  of extensive gluten chains. The dough gradually gets stiff, harder to manipulate,  and takes on a fine, satiny appearance. (If the dough is worked so hard that many  end-to-end bonds start breaking, its overall structure breaks down, and the dough  becomes sticky and inelastic. Overdevelopment is a real problem only when  kneading is done mechanically.)  Kneading also aerates the dough. As it’s repeatedly folded over and compressed,  pockets of air are trapped and squeezed under pressure into smaller, more  numerous pockets. The more pockets formed during kneading, the finer the  texture of the final bread. Most of the air pockets are incorporated as the dough  reaches its maximum stiffness.  Some bread recipes call for a bare minimum of kneading. This generally results in  fewer and larger air cells, and so a coarse, irregular texture that has its own appeal.  The gluten of such doughs is less developed as they begin fermentation, but the  rising of the dough continues to develop gluten structure (below), so little-  kneaded doughs can eventually rise well to give an airy, tender crumb.
Gluten formation. The view of wetted flour through a light microscope. Left: When  water is first added to flour, the gluten proteins are randomly oriented in a thick fluid.  Right: As this fluid is stirred, it quickly develops into a tangle of fibers as the glutenin  proteins form elongated bundles of molecules.  Gluten orientation. When flour is initially mixed with water, the glutenin molecules  form a random network of gluten chains. Kneading helps orient the gluten chains in  orderly arrays.  Food Words:   Knead  The word   knead   comes from an Indo-European root meaning “to compress  into a ball”; related words are   gnocchi, quenelle, knoll,   and   knuckle.
Kneading dough. Kneading repeatedly stretches and elongates the gluten, helping to  orient the long chains and encourage the side-by-side bonding that contributes to  gluten strength.  Fermentation, or Rising  Fermentation is the stage during which the dough is set aside for the yeast cells to  produce carbon dioxide, which diffuses into the air pockets, slowly inflates them,  and thus raises the dough. This gentle stretching action continues the process of  gluten orientation and development, as does the oxidizing effect of other yeast by-  products, which continue to help the glutenin molecules to link up end-to-end. As  a result, even initially wet, barely cohesive doughs become more manageable after  fermentation.  Yeasts produce carbon dioxide most rapidly at around 95ºF/35ºC, but they also  produce more noticeable quantities of sour and unpleasant-smelling by-products.  A fermentation temperature of 80ºF/27ºC is often suggested for a relatively quick  rising time of a couple of hours. Lower temperatures may extend fermentation  times by an hour or more, and with them the generation of desirable yeast flavors.  The end of the fermentation period is signaled by the dough’s volume — it  approximately doubles — and by the condition of the gluten matrix. When poked  with the finger, fully fermented dough will retain the impression and won’t spring  back: the gluten has been stretched to the limit of its elasticity. The dough is now  gently handled to reconsolidate the gluten, divide the gas pockets, redistribute the  yeast cells and their food supply, and even out the temperature and moisture  (fermentation generates heat, water, and alcohol). Thanks to the added moisture  and to the gluten-interrupting bubbles, fermented doughs feel softer and easier to  work than newly kneaded dough.
Doughs made from high-protein flours may be put through a second rising to  develop their tougher gluten fully. Either way, the fermented dough is then  divided, gently rounded into balls, rested for a few minutes to allow the gluten to  relax somewhat, and then molded into loaves. The loaves are then allowed another  partial rise, or “proof,” to prepare them for the final and dramatic rise during baking.  Retarding the Fermentation   Traditional breadmaking can last many hours, and  bakers would often have to work through the night in order to sell fresh bread in  the morning. In the 1920s, bakers in Vienna began to experiment with breaking  the work into two periods, a daytime stint for mixing, fermentation, and molding  into loaves, and then an early-morning baking. During the night, the formed loaves  were kept in a refrigerated chamber. Cool temperatures slow the activity of  microbes   substantially;   yeasts   take   10   times   longer   to   raise   bread   in   the  refrigerator than at warm room temperature. Refrigeration of dough is therefore  called   retarding,   and the cold chamber a   retarder.   Retarding is now a common  practice.  In addition to giving the baker greater flexibility, retarding has useful effects on the  dough. Long, slow fermentation allows both yeasts and bacteria more time to  generate flavor compounds. Cold dough is stiffer than warm dough, so it’s easier to  handle without causing a loss of leavening gas. And the cycle of cooling and  rewarming redistributes the dough gases (from small bubbles into the water  phase, then back out into larger bubbles), and encourages the development of a  more open, irregular crumb structure.  Baking  Ovens, Baking Temperatures, and Steam   The kind of oven in which bread is  baked has an important influence on the qualities of the finished loaf.  Traditional Bread Ovens   Until the middle of the 19th century, bread was baked in  clay, stone, or brick ovens that were preheated by a wood fire, and that could store  a large amount of heat energy. The baker started the fire on the floor of the oven,  let it burn for hours, cleaned out the ashes, and then introduced the loaves of  dough and closed the oven door. The oven surfaces start out at 700–900ºF/350–  450ºC, the domed roof radiating its stored heat from above, the floor conducting  heat directly into the loaves from beneath. As the dough heats it releases steam,  which fills the closed chamber and further speeds the transfer of heat to the
loaves. Slowly the oven surfaces lose their heat, and the temperature declines  during the bake, at the same time that the loaf is browning and therefore  becoming more efficient at absorbing heat. The result is a rapid initial heating that  encourages the dough to expand, and temperatures high enough to dry the crust  well and generate the color and flavors of the browning reactions (p. 778).  Modern Metal Ovens   The modern metal oven is certainly easier to bake in than  the wood-fired oven, but it isn’t as ideally suited to breadmaking. It usually has a  maximum cooking temperature of 500ºF/250ºC. And its thin walls are incapable of  storing much heat, so its temperature is maintained by means of gas flames or  electrical elements that get red-hot. When these heat sources switch on during  baking, the effective temperature temporarily rises well above the target baking  temperature, and the bread can be scorched. Because they are vented to allow the  escape of combustion gases (carbon dioxide and water), gas ovens don’t retain the  loaves’ steam well during the important early stage. Electric ovens do a better job.  Some of the advantages of the traditional stored-heat oven can be obtained from  the use of ceramic baking stones or wraparound ceramic oven inserts, which are  preheated to the oven’s maximum temperature and provide more intensive and  even heat during baking.  Steam   Steam does several useful things during the first few minutes of baking. It  greatly increases the rate of heat transfer from oven to dough. Without steam, the  dough surface reaches 195ºF/90ºC in 4 minutes; with steam, in 1 minute. Steam  thus causes a rapid expansion of the gas cells. As the steam condenses onto the  dough surface, it forms a film of water that temporarily prevents the loaf surface  from drying out into a crust, thus keeping it flexible and elastic so that it doesn’t  hinder the initial rapid expansion of the loaf, the “oven spring.” The overall result is  a larger, lighter loaf. In addition, the hot water film gelates starch at the loaf surface  into a thin, transparent coating that later dries into an attractively glossy crust.  Professional bakers often inject steam under low pressure into the oven for the first  several minutes of baking. In home ovens, spraying water or throwing ice cubes  into the hot chamber can produce enough steam to improve the oven spring and  crust gloss.  Early Baking: Oven Spring   When the bread first enters the oven, heat moves into  the bottom of the dough from the oven floor or pan, and into the top from the  oven ceiling and the hot air. If steam is present, it provides an initial blast of heat by
condensing onto the cold dough surface. Heat then moves from the surface  through the dough by two means: slow conduction through the viscous gluten-  starch matrix, and much more rapid steam movement through the network of gas  bubbles. The better leavened the dough, the faster steam can move through it,  and so the faster the loaf cooks.  As the dough heats up, it becomes more fluid, its gas cells expand, and the dough  rises. The main cause of this oven spring is the vaporization of alcohol and water  into gases that fill the gas cells, and that expand the dough by as much as half its  initial volume. Oven spring is usually over after 6–8 minutes of baking.  Mid-Baking: From Foam to Sponge   Oven spring stops when the crust becomes  firm and stiff enough to resist it, and when the interior of the loaf reaches 155–  180ºF/68–80ºC, the temperature range in which the gluten proteins form strong  cross-links with each other and the starch granules absorb water, swell, gelate, and  amylose molecules leak out of the granules. Now the walls of the gas cells can no  longer stretch to accommodate the rising pressure inside, so the pressure builds  and eventually ruptures the walls, turning the structure of the loaf from a closed  network of separate gas cells into an open network of communicating pores: from  an aggregation of little balloons into a sponge through which gases can easily  pass. (If the dough were not transformed into a sponge, then cooling would cause  each isolated gas cell to shrink, and the loaf would collapse.)  Late Baking: Flavor Development and Cooking Through   Baking is continued for  some time after the bread center approaches the boiling point. This gelates the  starch as thoroughly as possible, thus preventing the center from remaining damp  and heavy, and slowing subsequent staling. Continued baking also encourages the  surface browning reactions that improve both color and flavor. Though limited to  the hot, dry crust, these reactions affect the flavor of the whole loaf because their  products diffuse inward. A light-colored loaf will be noticeably less flavorful than a  dark one.  Bread is judged to be done when its crust has browned and its inner structure has  become fully set. The second condition can be verified indirectly by tapping on the  bottom of the loaf. If the interior still contains a continuous gluten mass with  embedded bubbles, it will sound and feel heavy and dense. If it has cooked  through and become an open sponge, the loaf will sound hollow.
Bread dough before and after baking. As the dough heats up, starch granules absorb  moisture   from   the   gluten,   swell,   and   leak   some   starch   molecules,   creating  reinforcement for the dough walls that surround the gas pockets.  Cooling  Immediately after being removed from the oven, the loaf’s outer layer is very dry,  around 15% water, and close to 400ºF/200ºC, while the interior is as moist as the  original dough, around 40% water, and around 200ºF/93ºC. During cooling, these  differences partly even themselves out. Moisture diffuses outward, and much of  the loaf’s moisture loss occurs now. It ranges from 10% to 20% of the dough  weight, depending on surface area, with small rolls losing the most and large  loaves the least.  As the temperature declines, the starch granules become firmer and so the loaf as  a whole becomes easier to slice without tearing. This desirable firming continues  over the course of a day or so, and turns out to be the first step in the process  called staling.  The Staling Process; Storing and Refreshing Bread  Staling   Staling takes place in the days following baking, and seems to involve the  loss of moisture: the bread interior gets dry, hard, and crumbly. It turns out that  bread will stale even when there’s no net loss of moisture from the loaf. This was
shown in the landmark study of bread staling in 1852, when the Frenchman Jean-  Baptiste Boussingault showed that bread could be hermetically sealed to prevent  it from losing water, and yet still go stale. He further showed that staling is reversed  by reheating the bread to 140ºF/60ºC: the temperature, we now know, at which  starch gelates.  Food Words:   Stale  Though   stale   now suggests a food that is past its prime, old and dried out, it  hasn’t always had these negative connotations. It is a medieval Teutonic word,  and originally meant “to stand” or “to age.” It was applied to wines and liquors,  which became clarified and stronger in flavor when they were allowed to  stand for some time and settle. A kind of settling and strengthening also takes  place among the starch molecules in bread, but these have toughening  effects that are undesirable, at least for bread to be eaten fresh. Stale  toughened bread does have its uses (see box, p. 542).  Staling is now understood to be a manifestation of starch retrogradation, the  recrystallization, water migration out of the granules, and hardening that take  place when cooked starch is then cooled (p. 548). The initial firming of the freshly  baked bread loaf, which improves its ability to be sliced, is caused by the  retrogradation of the simple straight-chain amylose molecules, and is essentially  complete within a day of baking.  The majority of starch molecules, the branched amylopectins within the granul,  also retrograde. But thanks to their irregular structure, they form crystalline regions  and expel water much more slowly, over the course of several days. This is the  process responsible for the undesirable firming in texture   after   the bread has  become sliceable. For some reason, both the rate and the extent of staling are  lower in lighter, less dense breads.  Certain emulsifying agents have been found to retard staling substantially and for  this reason have been added to mass-produced bread doughs for about 50 years.  True buttermilk (p. 50) and egg yolks are rich in emusifiers and have the same  effect. It’s thought that these substances complex with starch or in some other way
interfere with water movement, thereby inhibiting recrystallization.  The Virtues of Stale Bread  Cooks have long known that stale bread is a very useful ingredient in its own  right. It is more robust than fresh bread, and retains its sponge-like structure  in wet preparations that would cause fresh bread to disintegrate, such dishes  as bread salads, bread puddings, and   pain perdu.   Similarly, bread crumbs  retain their individual identity when wetted, and can serve as tender binding  agent in stuffings, panades, and breadings for frying. The source of dry bread’s  structural integrity is its starch. When it retrogrades, it forms some regions  that are extremely ordered and stable and that hold the rest of the starch  network strongly together (p. 458).  Reheating Reverses Staling   As long as much of the water released by the starch  granules remains in the surrounding gluten — that is, as long as the loaf isn’t too  old, or has been wrapped and refrigerated — staling can be reversed by heating  the bread above the gelation temperature of wheat starch, 140ºF/60ºC. Once more  the crystalline regions are disrupted, water molecules move in between the starch  molecules, and the granules and amylose gels become tender again. This is why  toasting sliced bread makes the interior soft, and why a loaf of bread can be  refreshed by heating it in the oven.  Storing   Bread:   Avoid   the   Refrigerator   Staling   proceeds   most   rapidly   at  temperatures   just   above   freezing,   and   very   slowly   below   freezing.   In   one  experiment, bread stored in the refrigerator at 46ºF/7ºC staled as much in one day  as bread held at 86ºF/30ºC did in six days. If you’re going to use bread in a day or  two, then store it at room temperature in a breadbox or paper bag, which reduces  moisture loss while allowing the crust to remain somewhat crisp. If you need to  keep bread for several days or more, then wrap it well in plastic or foil and freeze it.  Refrigerate bread (well wrapped) only if you’re going to toast or otherwise reheat  it.  Bread Spoilage   Compared to many foods, bread contains relatively little water,  and so it often dries out before it becomes infected by spoilage microbes. Keeping
bread at room temperature in a plastic bag allows moisture from the staling starch  granules to collect on the bread surfaces and encourages the growth of potentially  toxic molds, especially blue-green species of   Aspergillus   and   Penicillium,   gray-white  Mucor   species, and red   Monilia sitophila.  Bread Flavor  The incomparable flavor of simple wheat bread has three sources: the flavor of  wheat flour, the products of yeast and bacterial fermentation, and the reactions  caused by oven heat during baking. The aroma of low-extraction white flour is  dominated by vanilla, spicy, metallic, and fatty notes (from vanillin, a furanone, and  fatty aldehydes), while whole-meal flour is richer in most of these and in addition  has cucumber, fried, “sweaty,” and honey notes (from other fatty aldehydes and  alcohols and phenylacetic acid). Yeast fermentation generates a “yeasty” character,  a large part of which comes from fruity esters and eggy sulfur compounds. Baking  contributes the toasty products of browning reactions. Starters add general  complexity and a distinctive sour note from acetic and other organic acids.  Mass-Produced Breads  The manufacture of commercial breads bears little resemblance to the process  described above. Ordinary mixing, kneading, and fermentation require several  hours of work and waiting from the bread maker. In bread factories, high-powered  mechanical dough developers and chemical maturing agents (oxidizers) can  produce a “ripe” dough, with good aeration and gluten structure, in four minutes.  Yeast is added to such doughs mainly as flavoring. The formed loaves are proofed  briefly and then baked as they move through a tunnel-like metal oven. These  breads tend to have a very fine, cakelike texture, because machines are far more  efficient   at   aerating   dough   than   are   hands   or   stand   mixers. The   flavor   of  manufactured   bread   can   sometimes   be marked   by   such   unpleasant   aroma  compounds as sour, sweat-like isovaleric and isobutyric acids, which are produced  by flour and yeast enzymes in unbalanced amounts during intensive mixing and  high-temperature proofing.
A Scientific Definition of Bread Quality  Raymond Calvel is an eminent figure in the world of baking, a researcher and  teacher who made great contributions to the understanding and  improvement of bread quality in postwar France. His definition of high quality  in good French bread doesn’t necessarily apply in detail to other bread styles,  but it shows how much there is to appreciate in a well-made loaf.  A good bread — a real quality loaf — …will have a creamy white  crumb. The proper creamy-white color of the crumb shows that the  dough oxidation during mixing has not been excessive. It also presages  the distinctive aroma and taste that are a subtle blend of the scent of  wheat flour — that of wheat germ oil, along with the delicate hint of  hazelnut aroma that comes from the germ. All of these are combined  with the heady smell that comes from alcoholic dough fermentation,  along with the discreet aromas that are the results of caramelization  and crust baking…. the grain of French bread should be open, marked  here and there by large gas cells. These should be thin-walled cells, with  a lightly pearlescent appearance. This unique structure, resulting from  the combination of numerous factors including the level of dough  maturation and the loaf forming method, is basic to the eating  qualities, flavor, and gustatory appeal of French bread.  —   The Taste of Bread,   transl. R. L. Wirtz.  Special Kinds of Loaf Breads: Sourdough, Rye, Sweet, Gluten-  Free  Bakers make distinctive variations on the basic loaf bread from a variety of grains  and other ingredients. Here are brief descriptions of some of them.  Sourdough Breads   Sourdough breads get their name from the fact that both the  dough   and   bread   are   acid. The   acidity,   along   with   other   distinctive   flavor  components, is produced by bacteria that grow in the dough along with various  yeasts. The bacteria often include some of the same lactic acid bacteria that make  milk into yogurt and buttermilk (p. 44). The leavening for this kind of bread begins
as a “wild” starter, a mixture of whatever microbes happened to be on the grain  and in the air and other ingredients when flour was mixed with water. The mixture  of yeasts and bacteria is then perpetuated by saving a portion of the dough to  leaven the next batch of bread.  The first breads probably resembled modern sourdoughs, and bread in much of  the world is made with sourdough starters that give distinctive regional flavors.  The bacteria somehow delay starch retrogradation and staling, and the acids they  produce make the bread resistant to spoilage microbes: so sourdough breads are  especially flavorful and keep well. Because browning reactions are slowed in acid  conditions, sourdough breads tend to be lighter in color than straight yeast breads,  and their flavor less toasty.  It isn’t easy to make good bread with sourdough cultures. There are two reasons  for this. One is that the bacteria grow faster than the yeasts, almost always  outnumber them by factors of a hundred or a thousand, and inhibit the yeasts’ gas  production: so sourdoughs often don’t rise very well. The other is that acid  conditions and bacterial protein-digesting enzymes weaken the dough gluten,  which makes it less elastic and the resulting bread more dense.  Guidelines for Working with Sourdoughs   The key to successful baking with  sourdough starters is to limit bacterial growth and acidification, and encourage a  healthy yeast population. In general, this means keeping sourdough starters  relatively cool, and “refreshing” them frequently by adding new flour and water  and aerating them vigorously. Here are rules of thumb to keep in mind.  Both yeasts and bacteria grow fastest in liquid starters, which allow the microbes  easier access to nutrients; in a semisolid dough they grow more slowly and require  less frequent attention. Because growing microbes consume nutrients rapidly, and  produce acid and other growth-inhibiting substances, starters need to be divided  and refreshed frequently, two or more times per day. Adding new water and flour  dilutes the accumulated acids and other growth inhibitors, and provides a fresh  supply of food. Aerating the starter — whisking a liquid one, or kneading a doughy  one — supplies the oxygen that yeasts require to build cell membranes for new  cells. The more frequently the starter is divided and refreshed, the better the yeasts  will be able to grow, and the more leavening power the starter will have. Starters  should be incorporated into a dough when they’re actively growing and at their  bubbliest. While bacteria thrive at warm temperatures, 86–96ºF/30–35ºC, yeasts in  an acid environment grow better at a cooler 68–78ºF/20–25ºC; so both starters and
rising doughs should be kept relatively cool.  Finally, sourdoughs should be well salted. Salt limits bacterial protein-digesting  enzymes, and tightens the vulnerable gluten.  Frozen and Par-baked Doughs and Breads  Bread dough can be frozen, thawed, and baked into bread, but freezing kills a  large proportion of the yeast cells, which means less leavening power, a  slower rise, and the spread of yeast chemicals that weaken gluten. Sweet rich  doughs turn out to freeze the best.  The best stage at which to freeze bread dough is after the dough has risen  and baked for 70 to 80% of its usual baking time. This frozen “par-baked”  bread can be thawed and finished with just a few minutes in a hot oven. Yeast  survival is no longer important, because the yeast cells have done their  leavening and are killed during the initial bake.  Rye Breads   Though a minor grain compared to wheat, rye is still found in many  breads in Germany and elsewhere in northern Europe and Scandinavia. Most rye  breads baked today are made from mixtures of rye and wheat flours, with rye  providing its distinctive, full flavor and wheat the rising power of gluten. Rye  proteins simply don’t form an elastic network like gluten, apparently because the  glutenin molecules can’t link up end-to-end into long chains. Rye has another  major breadmaking liability: it tends to begin sprouting before harvest, so its  starch-digesting enzymes are active during baking and break down the other  major source of dough structure. Nevertheless bakers in northern Europe found a  way of making a unique raised bread from pure rye flour.  Pumpernickel   True   pumpernickel   was   apparently   born   during   a   famine   in  Westphalia in the 16th century. It starts with coarse whole-grain rye flour and a  several-stage sourdough fermentation; the acidity helps limit starch breakdown  and also makes the dough more elastic. The dough manages to retain some  carbon dioxide bubbles thanks to its high content of gummy cell-wall materials  called pentosans (p. 470). The fermented rye dough is baked in a pan at a low oven  temperature, or steamed, and for a very long time: 16 to 24 hours. The loaf
develops only a thin crust, and turns a dark chocolate-brown and takes on a rich  flavor thanks to the long cooking time and high concentration of free sugars and  amino acids, which undergo browning reactions. Because the abundant starch-  digesting enzymes are active for a long time during the slow baking, pumpernickel  may end up very sweet, with a sugar content of 20%.  Food Words:   Pumpernickel, Bagel, Pretzel, Brioche, Panettone, Pandoro  Three of these bread names are German in origin, three from Romance  languages.   Pumpernickel   comes from Westphalian dialect words for the devil  (St. Nick) and for “fart”: this is a high-fiber bread.   Bagel   comes via Yiddish from  a German root meaning “ring,” and   pretzel   directly from a German word of  Latin origin meaning “little bracelet,” so both are named for their shape.  Brioche   is French, its root apparently   broyer,   meaning to grind or knead. It first  appears in the 15th century to name breads enriched with butter but not yet  with eggs.   Panettone   and   pandoro   are 19th-century Italian coinages meaning  “grand bread” and “golden bread.”  The distinctive, complex flavor of rye bread comes largely from the grain itself,  which has   mushroom, potato, and green   notes (from   octenone,   methional,  nonenal). The   traditional   sourdough   fermentation   adds   malty,   vanilla,   fried,  buttery, sweaty, and vinegar notes.  Sweet and Rich Breads: Brioche, Panettone, Pandoro   Bread doughs that  contain substantial amounts of fat and/or sugar pose special challenges to the  baker. Both fat and sugar slow gluten development and weaken it, sugar because  it binds up water molecules and interrupts the gluten-water network, fat because  it bonds to fat-loving portions of the gluten chains and prevents them from  bonding to each other. Rich doughs are therefore relatively soft and fragile. Bakers  often build them by holding back the fat and sugar and kneading these in only  after developing the gluten network, and then bake the doughs in containers that  support their weight and prevent them from sagging and flattening. Large  amounts of sugar slow the growth of yeast by dehydrating the cells, so sweet  doughs are often made with more yeast than ordinary breads, and they may take
longer to rise. Sugar also makes sweet doughs prone to begin browning early in  the baking, so they’re usually baked at a relatively low oven temperature to  prevent the surface from browning before the interior has set.  French brioche dough is especially rich in butter and eggs. It’s often retarded  (chilled, p. 539) for 6–18 hours to stiffen it, then rolled out and briefly rested. This  makes the dough easier to handle and form before its final rise. Italian panettone  and pandoro are remarkable holiday breads that are enriched with large quantities  of sugar, egg yolks, and butter, but that keep well because they are built from a  sourdough that starts with a naturally leavened sponge.  Gluten-Free Breads   People whose immune systems are intolerant of gluten must  avoid wheat and its close relatives, and therefore can’t eat ordinary bread, where  gluten plays a major role in texture. A reasonable facsimile of raised bread can be  made with gluten-free flours or starches — rice flour, for example — that are  supplemented with xanthan gum and emulsifiers. The gum, which is secreted by a  bacterium and purified from industrial-scale fermenters, provides a modest gluten-  like elasticity, while the emulsifiers stabilize the gas bubbles and slow the diffusion  of carbon dioxide from the dough during baking.  Milk in Bread  Both fresh and powdered milk are sometimes included in doughs for their  flavor and nutritiousness, but they can weaken the gluten of bread dough  and produce a dense loaf. The culprit appears to be a whey protein, which can  be inactivated by scalding the milk — bringing it just to the boil — before  use. (The milk must be cooled before mixing to avoid precooking the flour  and damaging the yeast.)  Other Breads: Flatbreads, Bagels, Steamed Breads, Quick  Breads, Doughnuts  Light oven-baked loaves are the standard form of bread in Europe and North  America, but there are many other versions of the staff of life. Here are brief
descriptions of some of them.  Flatbreads   Thin flatbreads were the original breads, and are still a major source of  nourishment in many countries throughout the world. The essential characteristic  of flatbreads is that they cook very quickly, in as little as two minutes, on a simple  hot surface, whether a pan, an oven floor or wall, or a mass of hot pebbles. The  heat is often very high — pizza ovens can run at 900ºF/450ºC — and this means  that tiny air-pockets in the dough are puffed up by rapidly vaporizing steam,  essentially leavening the dough without the necessity of fermentation (though  many flatbreads are made with leavened doughs). This puffing, and the breads’  thinness, make them tender; and since neither requires a strong gluten, flatbreads  can be made from all kinds of grains. Despite the short baking time, the high  temperatures develop a delicious toasted flavor across the extensive surface of  flatbreads.  Flatbreads often puff to an impressive if temporary volume, and the central cavity  of pita and similar breads is used as a pocket for filling with other foods. Puffing  occurs when the two bread surfaces have set in the heat and become tougher  than the inner layer, where steam accumulates and eventually tears the tender  interior, forcing the two surfaces apart. When puffing is undesirable — in crackers,  for example, which would become too fragile — the sheeted dough is “docked,” or  pricked in a regular pattern with a pointed utensil — a fork, or a special stamp —  to form dense gluten nodes that resist puffing.  Some Flatbreads of the World  Country   Bread   Qualities  Unleavened  Israel   Matzoh   Very thin, cracker-like  Armenia   Lavash   Paper-thin, often dried and  rehydrated  Italy  (Sardinia)  Parchment bread,  carta di musica  Semolina flour, very thin
Country   Bread   Qualities  Norway   Lefse   Flour & potatoes, often  with butter, cream  Scandinavia   Various rye, oat,  barley flatbreads  Many dry  Scotland   Bannocks   Oat cakes  Tibet   Barley bread   From roasted barley flour, tsampa  China   Shaobing   Flour, water, lard, folded and rolled,  layered  Baobing   Hot-water dough, rolled very thin  for wrappers  India   Chapati   Whole-wheat, dry-roasted on pan  Phulka   Chapati cooked, then puffed  directly on coals  Paratha   Folded with ghee, rolled, layered  Puri, golegappa, lucchi   Deep-fried, puffed  Mexico   Tortillas   Wheat flour or maize  Leavened  Iran   Sangak   Whole wheat, baked on hot  pebbles  Italy   Focaccia   Moderate thickness  Pizza   Thin, cooked in very hot oven  (to 900ºF/450ºC)  Egypt   Baladi   Pocket bread  Ethiopia   Injera   Soured teff batter, bubbly and soft  India   Naan   Dough enriched with yogurt, baked  in tandoor  United  States  Soda cracker   Sourdough neutralized by baking  soda
Country   Bread   Qualities  English muffin   Small diameter, thick  Pretzel   Thin knotted cylinder  Pretzels   Pretzels are unusual for their woven shape, dark brown crust, and unusual  flavor. Like crackers, they’re made from a stiff yeast dough of soft wheat flour. In  manufacturing, the formed dough is sprayed for 10–15 seconds with a hot 1%  solution of alkaline sodium hydroxide (lye) or sodium carbonate. The heat and  moisture combine to gelate the surface starch. The dough is then salted and baked  for about five minutes in a very hot oven. The starch gel hardens to a shiny finish  and thanks to the alkaline conditions created by the lye, browning-reaction  pigments and flavor compounds rapidly accumulate. (The lye reacts with carbon  dioxide in the oven to form a harmless edible carbonate.) The final step is a long,  slow bake to dry the whole pretzel out. The pretzel is crisp but fragile thanks to tiny  airy bubbles and ungelated starch granules throughout, and it has a distinctive  flavor from its alkaline-browned surface.  Soft and homemade pretzels may be allowed to rise before being boiled briefly in  a solution of baking soda and then baked for 10 or 15 minutes in a hot oven.  Bagels   The bagel is a relatively small, ring-shaped bread that arose in Eastern  Europe, and was introduced to the United States by immigrants to New York in the  early 20th century.  Traditionally, the bagel had a shiny, thick, chewy crust and a dense interior; after its  popularity grew in the late 20th century, many bakers began to make it larger and  softer. Bagels are made with strong-gluten flour, which is made into a very stiff  dough (a standard bread dough has 65 parts water to 100 flour; bagel dough has  only 45 to 50). Traditional bagels are made by forming the dough, allowing it to  rise somewhat (an 18-hour retardation gives a good crumb), immersing it in  boiling water for 1.5–3 minutes on both sides to expand the interior and develop a  thick crust, and then baking it. In the modern method, which is simpler to  automate and takes a fraction of the usual time, the formed dough is steamed and  then baked, with no slow rise and no immersion in boiling water. The steaming  puffs the dough up more than rising and boiling do, and produces a thinner crust.
The result is a lighter, softer ring.  Asian Steamed Breads   The Chinese have been making and eating steamed  breads and buns for around 2,000 years. Asian breads are generally small, round,  very white, with a smooth, shiny surface and thin skin, and a moist, springy texture  that may be chewy ( mantou ) or tender and fluffy ( bao ). They are generally made  from soft wheats with moderate gluten content and strength. The relatively stiff  dough is fermented, rolled out several times, then cut, formed, proofed, and  steamed for 10–20 minutes.  Quickbreads: Biscuits, Biscotti, Scones   Quickbreads are appropriately named in  two ways: they are quick to prepare, being leavened with rapid-acting chemicals  and mixed briefly to minimize gluten development; and they should be quickly  eaten, because they stale rapidly. Batter breads are moister, richer, and keep longer  (p. 554).  The term   biscuit   is an ambiguous one. It comes from the French for “twice-cooked,”  and originally referred to breads and pastries that were baked until dry and hard.  The Italian hard cookies called   biscotti   remain true to this heritage; they’re lean  doughs leavened with baking powder, baked in flattish loaves, then cut crosswise  into thin pieces and rebaked at a low oven temperature to dry them out. French  biscuits   proper, and English   biskets,   were long-keeping sweets, small bread-like  loaves made from foamed egg whites, flour, and sugar. To this day in England, the  word is used for little sweet dry cakes, what Americans call   cookies.   Modern French  biscuits   are dryish cakes made from egg foams, usually moistened with a flavored  syrup or cream.  Biscuits became something entirely different in America, and early in its history  (see box below). American biscuits contain no sugar and often no eggs, are made  from a moist dough of milk or buttermilk, flour, pieces of solid fat, and baking  soda, and are cooked briefly into a soft, tender morsel. There are two styles: one  with a crusty, irregular top and tender interior; another with a flat top and flaky  interior. The first is made with minimal handling to avoid gluten development, the  second with just enough folding and kneading to develop a structure with  alternating layers of dough and fat. The simple recipe and short cooking mean that  the flavor of the flour itself is prominent.  English   scones   are   similar   to   American   biscuits   in   their   simplicity,   basic  composition, and floury taste. Irish soda bread is made with soft whole-wheat flour
and without fat.  Early American Biscuits  Despite their name, these American biscuits were cooked only once, and were  rich and moist, not dry.  Biscuit  One pound flour, one ounce butter, one egg, wet with milk and break  while oven is heating; and in same proportion.  Butter Biscuit  One pint each milk and emptins [liquid yeast], laid into flour, in sponge;  next morning add one pound butter melted, not hot, and knead into as  much flour as will with another pint of warmed milk, be of a sufficient  consistence to make soft — some melt the butter in the milk.  — Amelia Simmons,   American Cookery,   1796  Doughnuts and Fritters   Doughnuts and fritters are essentially pieces of bread or  pastry dough that are fried in oil rather than baked. Doughnuts have a moist  interior and little or no crust, while fritters are usually fried until crisp.  The word   doughnut   was coined in the United States in the 19th century to name  what the Dutch called   olykoeks,   portions of fried sweetened dough. Their great  popularity flowered in the 1920s, when machinery simplified the handling of the  soft, sticky doughs, which are rich in sugar, fat, and sometimes eggs. There are two  main styles: yeasted doughnuts are light and fluffy, while cake doughnuts,  leavened with baking powder, are denser. Light, yeasted doughnuts ride on the oil  surface and must be turned, which leaves a white band around their circumference  where the oil surface cooks the dough less thoroughly. Doughnuts are fried at a  moderate temperature, originally in lard and now usually in a hydrogenated  vegetable shortening, which solidifies when the doughnut cools to provide a dry  rather than oily surface.
Thin Batter Foods: Crêpes, Popovers, Griddle Cakes,  Cream Puff Pastry  Batter Foods  The difference between doughs and batters is reflected in their names.   Dough  comes from a root meaning “to form,” while   batter   comes from a root meaning “to  beat.” Doughs are firm enough to develop and sculpt by hand. Batters are too fluid  and elusive to hold, so we contain them in a bowl, mix them by battering them  repeatedly from within — by stirring — and cook them in a container to give them  form and solidity.  Batters are fluid because they include two to four times more water than doughs.  The water disperses the gluten proteins so widely that they form only a very loose,  fluid network. When we cook a batter, the starch granules absorb much of the  water, swell, gelate, leak amylose, stick to each other, and thus turn the fluid into a  solid but tender, moist structure. The gluten proteins play a secondary structural  role, providing an underlying cohesiveness that prevents the food from being  crumbly. But if the gluten is overdeveloped, it makes the food elastic and chewy.  Batters often contain eggs, and the egg proteins also contribute a nonelastic  solidity when they coagulate in the cooking heat. Fluid batters can’t retain much of  the gas slowly evolved by yeast, and are usually leavened either chemically, or else  mechanically, by beating air into the batter or its components.  Most batter products are meant to be delicate and tender. Tenderness can be  encouraged in several different ways.  •   The concentration of gluten proteins in the batter is reduced by the use of  pastry flour, or low-or no-gluten flours (buckwheat, rice, oat), or all-purpose  flour mixed with cornstarch or other pure starches.  •   Gluten development is minimized by minimal stirring of the ingredients.  •   Replacing milk or water with soured dairy products, notably buttermilk and  yogurt, helps produce an especially tender texture. This is mainly an effect of  their thick consistency, which means that it takes less flour to make the  batter properly thick. A spoonful of the finished batter therefore contains  less flour, less starch and gluten, and cooks to a more delicate structure.  •   Leavening   the   batter   with   gas   bubbles   not   only   divides   it   up   into
innumerable thin sheets surrounding the gas bubbles, it makes the batter  more viscous (as in sauce foams, p. 595), which again means that less flour is  needed to thicken it.  It’s useful to divide batter foods into two groups. Thin batters are both thin in  consistency   and   cooked   in   the   form   of   small,   thin,   free-standing   cakes.  Quickbreads and cakes are made from thicker batters, and are cooked in pans in  larger, deeper masses.  Crêpes  Crêpes   and   their   relatives   (Eastern   European   blintzes   and   palaschinki),   thin  unleavened pancakes that are cooked on a shallow pan and folded over a filling of  some kind, have been made for a thousand years from a simple batter of flour, milk  and/or water, and eggs. Their delicacy comes from their thinness. The batter is  carefully mixed to minimize gluten formation, allowed to stand for an hour or more  to allow the proteins and damaged starch to absorb water and air bubbles to rise  and escape, and then cooked for just a couple of minutes per side. In France, the  milk in crêpe batter is sometimes partly replaced with beer, and wheat flour with  buckwheat, especially in Brittany.  Food Words:   Crêpe  The French word   crêpe   comes from the Latin for “curled, wavy,” and probably  refers to the curling of the edge as it dries during cooking.  Popovers  Popovers are an American version of English Yorkshire pudding, which is cooked in  the fat rendered from a beef roast. The batter is almost identical to crêpe batter,  but a different cooking method transforms it into a large air pocket surrounded by  a thin layer of pastry. Popover batter is vigorously beaten to incorporate air and  cooked immediately, before the air bubbles have a chance to escape. The batter is  poured into a preheated, liberally oiled pan and set in a hot oven. The surfaces of
the batter set almost immediately. The air bubbles within the batter are trapped,  expand with the rising temperature, coalesce into one large bubble, and the liquid  batter balloons around it and sets into a thin blister. When cooked in a pan with  many cups, popovers rise unevenly, because the cups around the outside heat  faster than the ones in the middle of the pan.  Griddle Cakes: Pancakes and Crumpets  Griddle cakes are made from a more floury, viscous batter than crêpes, popovers,  and choux pastry, and can retain gas cells for the few minutes that it takes to cook  them; so they rise on the hot pan surface and develop an aerated, tender structure.  Pancakes may be leavened (and flavored) with yeast, or with whipped egg whites  folded into the batter, or chemical leavening, or some combination of these.  Russian blinis sometimes include beer, which may contribute effervescence. The  batter is poured onto the griddle and allowed to cook until bubbles begin to rise  and break on the upper surface; the cook then flips the cake to set the second side  before the leavening gas escapes.  Crumpets   are   an   English   invention,   small,   flat,   yeast-raised   cakes   with   a  distinctively pale, cratered top surface. They’re made from a somewhat thick  pancake batter that’s allowed to become bubbly from yeast activity, then poured  into ring molds to a depth of about 0.75 in/2 cm, cooked very slowly until bubbles  break and set on the surface, then unmolded and turned to cook briefly on the  hole-y side.  Griddle Cakes: Waffles and Wafers  Waffles and wafers have two things in common: the root word for their names, and  the unique method by which they’re cooked. Their flour-water mixture is spread in  a thin layer and pressed between two heated and embossed metal plates, which  spread them even thinner, conduct heat into them rapidly, and imprint them with  an attractive and often useful pattern. The usual square indentations increase the  area of crisp, browned surface and collect the butter, syrup, and other enrichments  that are often added on top. The French version, the   gaufre,   goes back to medieval  times, when street vendors would make them to order and serve them hot on  religious feast days.
An Early French Waffle Recipe  Waffles of Milk or Cream  Put a litron [13 oz/375 g] of flour in a bowl, break in two or three eggs  and mix together while adding some cream or milk and a pinch of salt.  Add a piece the size of two eggs of freshly made cream cheese, or  simply soft cheese from whole milk, and a quarteron [4 oz/125 g] of  melted butter. If you only add a half quarteron of butter, that is enough  provided that you add a half quarteron of good beef marrow crushed  very small.  Mix all this together, and when it is well bound, one should put the  waffle irons on the fire, and make the waffles. These waffles should be  eaten while they’re hot.  — La Varenne,   Le Cuisinier françois,   1651  Today the difference between wafers and waffles is a matter of texture. Wafers are  thin, dry, crisp, and when high in sugar are dense, almost hard. The most familiar  wafer is the ice cream cone; there are also French cookies called   gaufres   that are  similar to very thin, crisp   tuiles.   Waffles came to the United States from Holland in  the 18th century and are thicker, lighter, and more delicate thanks to leavening by  either yeast or a baking powder, which interrupts the cooked structure with gas  bubbles. They’re served fresh and hot, their honeycomb structure filled with butter  or syrup.  Modern waffle recipes are often essentially a lean pancake batter cooked in a  waffle iron instead of on a griddle, and they often produce a disappointing result  that is more leathery than crisp. Crispness requires a high proportion of fat, sugar,  or both: otherwise the batter essentially steams rather than fries, the flour proteins  and starch absorb too much softening water, and the surface ends up tough.  Cream Puff Pastry, Pâte À Choux  Choux   is the French word for “cabbage,” and choux pastry forms little irregular  cabbage-like balls that are hollow inside like popovers. Unlike popovers, choux
pastry becomes firm and crisp when baked. It provides the classic container for  cream fillings in such pastries as cream puffs (profiteroles) and éclairs, and also  makes such savory bites as cheese-flavored gougères and deep-fried beignets,  whose lightness inspired the name   pets de nonne,   “nun’s farts.”  Choux paste was apparently invented in late medieval times, and is prepared in a  very distinctive way. It’s a cross between a batter and a dough, and is cooked twice:  once to prepare the paste itself, and once to transform the paste into hollow puffs.  A large amount of water and some fat are brought to the boil in a pan, the flour is  added, and the mixture stirred and cooked over low heat until it forms a cohesive  ball of dough. Several eggs are then beaten sequentially into the dough until it  becomes very soft, almost a batter. This paste is then formed into balls or other  shapes and baked in a hot oven or deep-fried. As with the popover, the surface  sets while the interior is still nearly liquid, so the trapped air coalesces and expands  into one large bubble.  The Logic of Cream Puff Pastry  The technique for preparing cream puff pastry may seem tediously elaborate,  but it’s a brilliant invention. It produces an especially rich and moist paste that  the cook can shape and cook into a hollow, crisp vessel for other ingredients.  Cooking the flour with water and fat tenderizes the gluten proteins,  preventing them from developing elasticity, and it swells and gelates the  starch to turn what would normally be a batter into a dough. The subsequent  addition of raw eggs contributes the richness of the yolks and the cohesive,  structure-building proteins of the whites, and thins the dough into a  nearbatter so that air pockets in the interior will be able to move and coalesce  during cooking. During the baking, the fat helps crisp and flavor the outer  surface. And both eggs and fat contribute to a structure that resists moisture  and stays crisp while holding the cream filling.  Frying Batters  A number of foods, especially seafood, poultry, and vegetables, are sometimes
coated with a layer of flour batter before deep-frying (or sometimes baking). A  good batter adheres well to the food, and fries into a crust that has a long-lasting  crunchiness and that readily breaks apart in the mouth without an oily residue.  Problematic batters fall away during frying or produce a crust that’s greasy, chewy,  and tough, or soft and mushy.  Batters include some kind of flour, a liquid that might be water, milk, or beer,  sometimes a chemical leavening to provide gas bubbles and lightness, and often  eggs, whose proteins promote adherence to the food and allow the use of less  flour. Of all the ingredients, the flour has the largest influence on batter quality. Too  much can produce a tough, bready coating; too little and it will be fragile. The  gluten proteins in ordinary wheat flour are valuable for the clinginess they provide,  but they form elastic gluten and absorb both moisture and fat, and so are  responsible for both chewiness and oiliness in the fried crust. For these reasons,  moderate-protein flours make better batters than bread flour, and some batters  are made from other grains, or from a mixture of wheat flour and other flours or  starches. Rice proteins don’t form gluten and absorb less moisture and fat, so  batters that contain a substantial proportion of rice flour fry crisper and drier.  Similarly, corn flour improves crispness because its relatively large particles are less  absorbant, and its proteins dilute wheat gluten and reduce the chewiness of the  crust. Adding some pure corn starch also reduces the proportion and influence of  wheat gluten proteins. Root flours and starches don’t work well in batters because  their starch granules gelate and disintegrate at relatively low temperatures, do so  early in frying, and produce a soft crust that gets soggy quickly.  Batters adhere better to moist foods when the foods are predipped in dry particles,  whether seasoned flour or bread-crumbs; the dry particles stick to the moist  surface, and the moist batter then clings to the rough surface created by the  particles. Batters are more likely to produce crisp, tender crusts if they’re prepared  just before frying, with cold liquid and little mixing to minimize water absorption  and gluten development (see Japanese tempura, p. 214). If a batter stands for a  long time before the food is dipped and fried, many of its air and gas bubbles can  leak out, and some of the remaining chemical leavening reacts too early; the result  is a dense casing rather than a light puff.
Thick Batter Foods: Batter Breads and Cakes  Batter Breads and Muffins  Batter breads and muffins are moister, usually sweeter versions of quickbreads (p.  549). They’re leavened with baking powder or soda, and often contain moderate  amounts of egg and fat in addition to sugar. They develop a dense, moist texture  that accommodates nuts, dried fruits, and even such fresh fruits and vegetables as  apples, blueberries, carrots and zucchini, whose moistness readily blends into the  moistness of the crumb. Potatoes and bananas can be mashed to become part of  the batter itself.  Muffin batters generally contain less sugar, eggs, and fat than quickbreads. The  ingredients are mixed together just enough to dampen the solids, and the mix  baked in small portions rather than a large loaf. Well-made muffins have an even,  open, tender interior. They stale quickly because the small proportion of fat is  dispersed unevenly by the minimal mixing and can’t protect much of the starch.  Overmixing produces a less tender, finer interior with occasional coarse tunnels,  which develop when the overly elastic batter traps the leavening gas in large  pockets.  Green Blueberries and Blue Walnuts   Sometimes the solid ingredients folded into  bread and muffin batters turn disconcerting colors: blueberries, carrots, and  sunflower seeds may go green, and walnuts blue. This happens when the mix  contains too much baking soda, or when the soda isn’t evenly mixed in the batter,  so that there are concentrated alkaline pockets. Because the anthocyanin and  related pigments in fruits, vegetables, and nuts are sensitive to pH, and their  normal surroundings are acidic, alkaline batters cause their colors to change (p.  281). Small brown spots on the surface of the finished bread or muffin are also a  sign of incomplete mixing; the browning reactions proceed faster in more alkaline  portions of the batter.  Cakes  The essence of most cakes is sweetness and richness. A cake is a web of flour, eggs,  sugar, and butter (or shortening), a delicate structure that readily disintegrates in  the mouth and fills it with easeful flavor. Cakes often contain more sugar and fat
than they do flour! And they serve as a base for even sweeter and richer custards,  creams, icings, jams, syrups, chocolate, and liqueurs. As suits their luxurious nature,  they’re often elaborately shaped and decorated.  A cake’s structure is created mainly by flour starch and by egg proteins. The tender,  melt-in-the-mouth texture comes from gas bubbles, which subdivide the batter  into fragile sheets, and from the sugar and fat, which interfere with gluten  formation and egg protein coagulation, and interrupt the network of gelated  starch. The sugar and fat can compromise lightness if they weaken the cake  structure so much that it can’t support its own weight. Of course dense, heavy  cakes can be delicious in their own way. Flourless chocolate cakes, nut cakes, and  fruit cakes are examples.  Traditional Cakes: Limited Sweetness and Hard Work   Well into the 20th century,  risen cakes were typified by the English pound cake or French   quatre quarts,   “four  quarters,” which contain equal weights of the four major ingredients: structure-  building   flour   and   eggs,   and   structure-weakening   butter   and   sugar.   These  proportions push the flour’s starch and the eggs’ proteins to their limit for holding  the fat and sugar in a tender, light scaffolding; more butter or sugar collapses the  scaffolding and makes dense, heavy cakes. And because cake batter must be filled  with many small bubbles without the help of yeasts, which generate gas too slowly  for the batter to hold them, traditional cake making was hard work. In 1857, Miss  Leslie described a technique by which the cook could beat eggs “for an hour  without fatigue” and then added: “But to stir butter and sugar is the hardest part of  cake making. Have this done by a manservant.” Fannie Farmer warned in 1896 that  “A cake can be made fine grained only with long beating.”  An Early English Pound Cake Recipe  In the centuries before electric mixers and preleavened shortenings, filling a  dense cake batter with many fine air bubbles was hard, prolonged work!  To Make a Pound Cake  Take a pound of butter, beat it in an earthen pan, with your hand one  way, till it is like a fine thick cream; then have ready twelve eggs, but  half the whites, beat them well, and beat them up with the butter, a
pound of flour beat in it, and a pound of sugar, and a few caraways;  beat it all well together for an hour with your hand, or a great wooden  spoon. Butter a pan, and put it in and bake it an hour in a quick oven.  — Hannah Glasse,   The Art of Cookery Made Plain and Easy,   1747  Modern American Cakes: Help from Modified Fats and Flours   Beginning  around 1910, several innovations in oil and flour processing led to major changes  in American cakes. The first innovation made it possible to leaven cakes with much  less work. The hydrogenation of liquid vegetable oils to make solid fats allowed  manufacturers to produce specialized shortenings with the ideal properties for  incorporating air quickly at room temperature (p. 557). Modern cake shortenings  also contain tiny bubbles of nitrogen that provide preformed gas cells for  leavening, and emulsifiers that help stabilize the gas cells during mixing and  baking, and disperse the fat in droplets that won’t deflate the gas cells.  The second major innovation was the development of specialized cake flour, a soft,  low-protein flour that is very finely milled and strongly bleached with chlorine  dioxide or chlorine gas. The chlorine treatment turns out to cause the starch  granules to absorb water and swell more readily in high-sugar batters, and  produce a stronger starch gel. It also causes fats to bind more readily to the starch  granule   surface,   which   may   help   disperse   the   fat   phase   more   evenly.   In  combination with the new shortening and with double-acting baking powders,  cake flour allowed U.S. food manufacturers to develop “high-ratio” packaged cake  mixes, in which the sugar can outweigh the flour by as much as 40%.The texture of  the cakes they make is distinctively light and moist, fine and velvety.  Thanks to these qualities and to the convenience of premeasured ingredients,  packaged cake mixes were a great success: just 10 years after their major  introduction following World War II, they accounted for half of all cakes baked in  U.S. homes. The very sweet, tender, moist, light cake became the American  standard; and hydrogenated shortening and chlorinated flour became standard  kitchen supplies for cakes made “from scratch.”  The Disadvantages of Modified Fats and Flours   Hydrogenated   vegetable  shortenings and chlorinated flour are very useful, but have drawbacks that lead  some bakers to avoid them. Hydrogenated shortening does not have the flavor
that butter does, and has the more serious disadvantage of containing high levels  of trans fatty acids (10–35% compared to butter’s 3–4%; seep. 38). Chlorinated  flour has a distinctive taste that some bakers dislike (others find that it enhances  cake aroma). And the chlorine ends up in fat-like flour molecules that accumulate  in animal bodies. There’s no evidence that this accumulation is harmful, but the  European Union and the United Kingdom consider the safety of chlorinated flour  unproven, and forbid its use. The U.S. FDA and the World Health Organization  consider chlorinated flour a safe ingredient for human consumption.  Manufacturers are addressing some of these problems and uncertainties. For  example, the effects of flour chlorination can be approximated by heat treatment,  and vegetable oils can be hardened without the production of trans fatty acids. So  it’s likely that cooks will eventually be able to make high-ratio cakes with less  questionable ingredients.  Cake Ingredients   Cakes are generally made with flour, eggs, sugar, and either  butter or shortening. Eggs are 75% water and may provide all the moisture in a  recipe; or various dairy products — milk, buttermilk, sour cream — may be  included to provide moisture as well as richness and flavor. Because the sugar is  used to incorporate air into the mix, the preferred form is finely granulated (“Extra-  Fine,”   “Superfine”) so as to maximize the numbers of small sharp edges that will cut  into the fat or eggs. Because they’re filled with bubbles in the mixing process, cake  recipes usually call either for no chemical leavening, or for less than other batter  recipes do.  Standard Cake Proportions and Qualities  Flour   Eggs   Fat   Sugar   Qualities  Pound cake   100   100   100   100   Moist, soft, rich  Butter cake   100   40   45   100   Moist, soft  Genoise   100   150-200   20-  40  100   Light, springy,  somewhat dry  Biscuit   100   150-220   0   100   Light, springy, dry  Sponge cake   100   225   0   155   Light, springy, sweet
Angel food  cake  100   350  (whites)  0   260   Light, springy, very  sweet  Chiffon   100   200   50   135   Light, moist  Flours, Starches, Cocoa   Cake bakers use low-protein pastry or cake flours to  minimize the toughening that comes with gluten formation. They’re not really  interchangeable; cake flours are both chlorinated and milled into very small  particles to produce a fine, velvety texture. Cooks who prefer not to use cake flours  can approximate their protein content and increase fineness by adding starch to  all-purpose or pastry flours. Corn starch is the most commonly available starch in  the United States; potato and arrowroot starches lack cornstarch’s cereal flavor and  gelate at lower temperatures, which can reduce cooking times and produce a  moister cake. Some cakes are made with pure starch or starchy chestnut flour only,  and no wheat flour at all.  In chocolate cakes, cocoa powder takes on some of the water-absorbing and  structural duties of flour; it’s around 50% carbohydrate, including starch, and 20%  nongluten protein. Cocoa powders may be “natural” and acidic or “dutched” and  alkaline (p. 705), a difference that affects both leavening and flavor balance; cake  recipes should specify which kind to use, and the baker should not substitute one  for the other. If chocolate rather than cocoa is used, it must be melted and carefully  incorporated into the fat or eggs. Different chocolates contain widely varying  proportions of cocoa fat, cocoa solids, and sugar (p. 704), so again, bakers and  recipes should be clear about what kind of chocolate is to be used.  Fats   In the standard method for making pound and layer cakes, the cook beats fat  and sugar together to incorporate air bubbles, until the mixture reaches the fluffy  consistency of whipped cream. Solid fats retain air bubbles thanks to their  semisolid consistency: the air carried along by the sugar crystals and beater  becomes immobilized in the mixture of crystalline and liquid fat. Butter is the  traditional cake fat, and is still the fat of choice for bakers who value flavor more  than lightness of texture.  But modern vegetable shortenings do a better job of incorporating air bubbles  into the cake batter. Animal fats — butter and lard — tend to form large fat crystals
that collect large air pockets, which rise in thin batter and escape. Vegetable  shortenings are made to contain small fat crystals that trap small air bubbles, and  these   bubbles   stay   in   the   batter.   Manufacturers   also   fill   shortenings   with  preformed   bubbles   of   nitrogen   (around   10%   of   the   volume),   and   bubble-  stabilizing emulsifiers (up to 3% of the shortening weight). Butter is best aerated at  a relatively cool 65ºF/18ºC, while shortening creams most effectively at a warm  room temperature, between 75 and 80ºF/24–27ºC.  Fat Replacers   The moistening and tenderizing effects of fat — but not its aerating  abilities — can be imitated by some concentrated fruit purees, notably prune,  apple, apricot, and pear. Their high levels of viscous plant carbohydrates, mainly  pectins and hemicelluloses, bind water and also interrupt the gluten and starch  networks. So these fruit purees can be used to replace some of the fat in cake  recipes. The result is usually moist and tender, but also denser than a full-fat cake.  Mixing Cake Batters   In cake making, the mixing step doesn’t just combine the  ingredients into a homogeneous batter: it has the critical purpose of incorporating  air bubbles into the batter, and thereby strongly influencing the final texture of the  cake. The various ways of aerating the batter help define families of cakes (see box,  p. 557). They involve beating the sugar and/or the flour into the fat, the eggs, or all  the liquid ingredients. The fine solid particles carry tiny air pockets on their  surfaces, and the particles and beating utensils carry those pockets into the fat or  liquid. Flour is often added only after the foam is formed, and then by gently  folding it in, not beating, to avoid popping a large fraction of the bubbles, and to  avoid developing gluten. (For folding as a mixing technique, see p. 112.) Mixing the  dry flour and fat together also prevents the gluten proteins from bonding strongly  to each other.  Preleavened shortening and electric mixers have helped to turn cake making into a  far less onerous task than it once was, but the mixing stage can still take 15  minutes or more.  Bakers often modify or combine elements of these techniques. In the “pastry-  blend” method, the flour, sometimes with the sugar, is creamed with the fat, then  the liquid ingredients are added and mixed long enough to augment the initial  aeration.  Another alternative is a combination of the fat and egg aerations: some of the  sugar is used to aerate the fat, some the eggs, and the two foams are then
combined.  Techniques for Aerating Cakes  Fat-sugar aeration: Sugar beaten into butter or shortening; other ingredients  then folded in  •   Pound cake, French   quatre quarts,   American butter and layer cakes, fruit  cake  Egg-sugar aeration: Sugar beaten with whole eggs, or separated yolks or  whites; other ingredients then folded in  •   Whole eggs:   Génoise  •   Yolks and whites aerated separately: French   biscuit,   Black Forest cake  •   Yolks only: Sponge cake  •   Whites only: Angel food cake; chiffon cake; flourless meringue and  dacquoise  All-ingredients aeration: Flour, eggs, sugar, shortening all beaten together  •   Commercial cake mixes  No aeration: Ingredients stirred together with minimal incorporation of air  •   Dissolved-sugar cakes:   pain d’épices,   spice cake  Baking Cakes   Cake baking can be divided into three stages: expansion, setting,  and browning. During the first stage, the batter expands to its full volume. As the  batter temperature rises, the gases in the air cells expand, chemical leavening  releases carbon dioxide, and beginning around 140ºF/60ºC, water vapor begins to  form and expand the air cells even further. During the second stage of cake baking,  the risen batter is set into its permanent shape by the oven heat. Beginning around  180ºF/80ºC, the egg proteins coagulate, and starch granules absorb water, swell,  and gelate. The actual setting temperature depends strongly on the proportion of  sugar, which delays both protein coagulation and starch swelling; in a high-ratio  cake, the starch may not gelate until close to 212ºF/100ºC. In the last stage, batter
solidification is completed, flavor-enhancing browning reactions take place in the  now-dried surface, and the cake often shrinks slightly, an indication that it should  be taken out of the oven. Another test of doneness is to probe the center with a  toothpick or wire cake tester, which should come out clean of any batter or crumb  particles.  Baking a cake. Left: A typical cake batter includes starch granules from flour, egg  proteins that coagulate when heated, and gas bubbles incorporated during mixing, all  swimming in a syrup of water and sugar. (Most cakes include some form of fat, which  is not shown here for the sake of clarity.) Center: When the mix is heated, the gas  bubbles expand, causing the mix to rise. At the same time, the proteins begin to  unfold and the starch granules begin to absorb water and swell. Right: At the end of  baking, the fluid batter has set into a porous solid, thanks to the continued swelling  and gelation of the starch granules and the coagulation of the egg proteins.  Cakes are generally baked at moderate oven temperatures, 350 to 375ºF/ 175–  190ºC. Below this range, the batter sets slowly, expanding gas cells can coalesce to  produce a coarse, heavy texture, and the upper surface sinks. Above this range, the  outer portions of the batter set before the inside has finished expanding, which  produces a peaked, volcano-like surface, and the surface browns excessively.
Baking Cakes at High Altitudes  Cake recipes that work well at sea level can produce dry, dense disasters in  kitchens at high altitudes. The reason for this is that the low air pressure in the  mountains allows water to boil at a lower temperature than the 212ºF/100ºC  characteristic of sea level. The drops in pressure and boiling point have  several effects on a cake in the oven. The batter starts to lose moisture at  lower temperatures, and dries out more rapidly. The air bubbles and  leavening expand faster at temperatures below the setting temperature, and  the protein and starch set and stabilize that structure slowly, because the  batter temperature doesn’t get as hot. So a cake baked in the mountains  tends to end up dry, coarse, and flat.  A cake recipe developed at sea level must be adjusted in order for it to work  at several thousand feet. The loss of moisture can be compensated for by the  addition of extra liquid. The overexpansion of the gas cells can be reduced by  reducing the amount of leavening. And the structure-stabilizing elements can  be set earlier by reducing the levels of sugar and fat and increasing the eggs  and/or flour. Increasing the oven temperature also speeds the protein  coagulation and starch gelation that set the structure.  Cake Pans   By affecting the rate and distribution of heating, cake pans can have an  important influence on their contents. The ideal pan size is that which matches the  final volume of the cake, which is usually 50–100% greater than the initial batter  volume. Doughnut-shaped tube pans, with the hole at their center, provide a  greater surface area and speed the penetration of heat into the batter. Bright  surfaces reflect radiant heat, transmit heat poorly to the food they contain, and  slow the baking process. A dull metal pan or a glass one (which also transmits  radiant heat well) will cook a cake as much as 20% faster than a shiny pan, while a  black surface tends to absorb heat quickly and cause rapid surface browning.  Recent innovations in nonmetal baking containers include flexible silicone molds  and paper molds, larger and stiffer and more elegant versions of muffin and  cupcake papers.  Cooling and Storing Cakes   Most cakes require a cooling period before they’re
removed from their pans or otherwise handled. Their structures are quite delicate  when still hot, but become firm as the starch molecules begin to settle back into  close, orderly associations with each other. Pound and butter cakes are fairly  robust, their structure coming mainly from gelated starch, and can be removed  from their pans after just 10–20 minutes. The sweeter eggaerated cakes are held  up largely by the coagulated egg proteins, which form a more gas-tight film  around the gas cells than starch does, and therefore shrink as the gas within cools  and contracts. The result can be a collapsed cake. To avoid this, angel, sponge, and  chiffon cakes are cooked in tube pans that can be inverted and suspended over a  bottle to cool. Gravity keeps the cake structure stretched to its maximum volume  while the walls of the gas cells firm and develop cracks that allow the pressure  inside and outside the cells to equalize.  Cakes keep for several days at room temperature, and they can be refrigerated or  frozen. They stale more slowly than bread, thanks to the presence of emulsifiers  and their high proportions of moisture, fat, and moisture-retaining sugar.  Pastries  Pastries bear little family resemblance to cakes or breads or pastas. They’re a very  different expression of the nature of the wheat grain. In making other dough and  batter foods, we use water to fuse the particles of wheat flour into an integrated  mass of gluten and starch granules, and further knit that mass together with  cooking. By contrast, pastry is an expression of the fragmentary, discontinuous,  particulate qualities of wheat flour. We use just enough water to make a cohesive  dough from the flour, and work in large amounts of fat to coat and separate flour  particles and dough regions from each other. Cooking gelates half or less of the  water-deprived starch, and produces a dry mass that readily crumbles or flakes in  the mouth, releasing the fat’s complementary moist richness.  Many pastries are not prepared and eaten on their own as other dough and batter  foods are. Instead they serve as a contrasting container for a moist filling, whether  savory (quiche, pâté, meat pies, vegetable tarts) or sweet (fruit pies and tarts,  creams, custards). The container may be open, as in tarts and open-faced pies, a  closed double-crust pie, or fully enclosed turnovers — samosas, empanadas,  pasties, pierogi, piroshki. We also use the term “pastry” for what are essentially  sweet breads whose structure is divided by layers of fat. Croissants and Danish
pastries are really bread-pastry hybrids.  Pastry making flowered in the Mediterranean region in the late Middle Ages and  early Renaissance, when puff and cream puff pastries first appeared. By the time of  La Varenne in the 17th century, both crumbly and puff pastries were standard  preparations. The bread-pastry hybrids are a more recent invention from the late  19th and 20th centuries.  Food Words:   Pastry, Pasta, Pâté, Pie  The English word   pastry,   Italian   pasta,   and French   pâte   and   pâté   all go back to  a suggestive group of ancient Greek words having to do with small particles  and fine textures: they variously referred to powder, salt, barley porridge,  cake, and an embroidered veil. A later Latin derivative,   pasta,   was applied to  flour that had been wetted to a paste, then dried; it led to Italian   pasta   and to  pâte   meaning “dough.”   Pâté   is a medieval French word that was given  originally to a chopped meat preparation enclosed in a dough, but eventually  came to name the meat preparation itself, with or without enclosure.   Pie   was  the near equivalent of the original   pâté   in medieval English, and meant a dish  of any sort — meat, fish, vegetable, fruit — enclosed in pastry. The word had  less to do with doughs than with odds and ends: it came from   magpie,   a bird  with variegated coloring that collects miscellaneous objects for its nest.  Pastry Styles  There are several different styles of pastry, each with a different texture that is  created by the kinds of particles into which they come apart when chewed.  •   Crumbly pastries   — short pastry, pâte brisée — come apart into small,  irregular particles.  •   Flaky pastries   — American pie crusts — come apart in small, irregular, thin  flakes.  •   Laminated pastries   — puff pastry, phyllo, strudel — are constructed of large,  separate, very thin layers that shatter in the mouth into small, delicate
shards.  •   Laminated breads   — croissants, Danish pastries — combine the layering of  the laminated pastries with the soft chewiness of bread.  These varied structures and textures depend on two key elements: the way the fat  is incorporated into the dough, and the development of the flour gluten. Pastry  makers work fat in so that it either isolates very small dough particles from each  other, isolates larger masses or even whole sheets of dough from each other, or  both. And pastry cooks carefully control gluten development to avoid making a  dough that’s hard to shape and a pastry that’s tough and chewy instead of tender  and delicate.  Pastry structures (uncooked doughs shown at bottom; cooked pastries at top). The key  to pastry structure is the distribution of the fat, here shown as a light layer surrounding  darker masses of dough. Left: In crumbly pastries, fat coats and separates small  particles of dough. Center: In flaky pastries, fat coats and separates flattened pieces of  dough. Right: In laminated pastries, fat coats and separates extended, thin sheets of  dough. The sheets in laminated pastries are so light that cooking steams them apart  into a light, airy structure.  Varieties of Pastry in Elizabethan Times  Beginning in the Middle Ages, one of the primary purposes of pastry was to  contain and help preserve preparations of meat. Meat brought to a simmer  inside a thick, durable crust would essentially be pasteurized and protected  against contamination by microbes in the air, so in a cool place it would keep
for many days. Other dishes to be eaten freshly baked would be made with a  more delicate pastry. As Gervase Markham wrote around 1615 in   The English  Housewife ,  our English housewife must be skilful in pastry, and know how and in  what manner to bake all sorts of meat, and what paste is fit for every  meat, and how to handle and compound such pastes.  Pastry Ingredients  Flours   Pastries are made from several different kinds of flour. A crumbly texture,  which requires minimal gluten development, is best obtained with a pastry flour  moderately low in protein; some protein is necessary to provide continuity in the  dough particles, or the pastry comes out chalky rather than crumbly. Flakiness and  the laminated structure of puff pastry depend on controlled gluten development,  and can be achieved with pastry flour or with flour of a higher protein content, the  equivalent of U.S. national all-purpose flours (11–12%). Highly stretched strudel  and phyllo can benefit from the very high protein content of bread flours and the  strong gluten they form.  Fats   Much of the flavor of pastry — and much of the pleasure — comes from its  fat, which may be a third or more of its weight. But pastry makers often choose a  fat that has little or no flavor. This is because the fat must have the necessary  consistency for producing the desired texture. Broadly speaking, any fat or oil can  be worked finely into flour to make crumbly pastry, while flaky and laminated  pastries require fats that are solid but malleable at cool room temperature: namely  butter, lard, or vegetable shortening. Of these, shortenings are the easiest to work  with, and produce the best textures.  Fat Consistency: Butter and Lard Are Demanding   At any given temperature, solid  fats have different consistencies that depend on what fraction of their molecules is  in solid crystals, and what fraction is liquid. Above about 25% solids, fat is too hard  and brittle to roll into an even layer. Below about 15% solids, fat is too soft to work;  it sticks to the dough, doesn’t hold its shape, and leaks liquid oil. The ideal fat for  flaky and laminated pastries is therefore one that has between 15 and 25% solids
at kitchen temperature, and at the temperatures that the pastry dough reaches as  it’s mixed and formed. It turns out that butter has the right consistency for making  pastry in a relatively narrow temperature range, between 58 and 68ºF/15–20ºC.  Lard is properly workable at only slightly warmer temperatures, up to 75ºF/25ºC.  Our flavorful natural fats easily get too soft in the kitchen to make good pastry.  This is why pastry makers often prechill ingredients and utensils, work on a cold  marble surface that keeps the ingredients cool during the mixing and rolling out,  and value assistants with constitutionally cold hands.  Fat   Consistency:   Shortenings   Are   Forgiving   Manufacturers   of   vegetable  shortenings control the consistency of their products by controlling how much of  the base oil’s unsaturated fat is hydrogenated (p. 801). Standard cake shortening  has the desirable 15–25% solids over a temperature range triple that of butter,  from 53 to 85ºF/12–30ºC. It’s therefore much easier to make flaky pastry with  shortening than with butter. Because laminated pastries and breads are especially  tricky to make, professionals and manufacturers often use shortenings that have  been formulated specifically for their production. Danish margarines are workable  up to 95ºF/35ºC, and puff-pastry margarines to 115ºF /46ºC: they don’t melt until  well into the baking process! However, high melting points have an important  drawback: they mean that the fat remains solid at mouth temperature. Where  butter and lard melt in the mouth and release luscious flavor, manufactured pastry  shortenings can leave a pasty or waxy residue in the mouth, and have no true  flavor of their own (they’re often flavored with milk solids).  Water in Pastry Fats   An important difference between butter and either lard or  shortening is that butter is about 15% water by weight, and therefore doesn’t  separate dough layers as thoroughly as the pure fats do; water droplets in the fat  can glue adjacent layers together. Pastry makers generally prefer European-style  butters, which contain less water than standard American butter (p. 35). However,  some water is useful for producing steam that pushes apart the dough layers of  laminated pastries. Manufacturers formulate puff-pastry margarine with about  10% water.  Other Ingredients   Water is essential for binding the flour particles into a dough,  and the water content is especially critical in pastries because there is so little.  Pastry cooks say that as little as ½ teaspoon/3 ml variation in water in 1 cup/120  gm flour can make the difference between a crumbly texture and a tough one.  Eggs are often used to provide richness and added cohesiveness to crumbly
pastries, and of course also contribute water. Various dairy products, including  milk, cream, sour cream, crème fraîche, and cream cheese may replace some or all  of the water, and at the same time provide flavor and fat as well as sugars and  proteins for the browning reactions. Salt is added mainly for flavor, though it does  have a tightening effect on gluten.  Cooking Pastries  Baking Pans   Two portions of the same pastry dough, baked in the same oven but  in different kinds of pan, will cook differently. Shiny pans reflect much of the oven’s  radiant heat (p. 782) away from the crust and so are slow cooking. Black pans  absorb most of the radiant heat and conduct it to the crust, and clear glass allows  it to pass right through and heat the crust directly. Thin metal pans can’t hold  much heat in themselves and so tend to slow heating and produce uneven  browning.   Heavier   gauge   metal   pans   and   ceramic   plates   and   molds   can  accumulate oven heat, get hotter than thin pans, and transmit the heat more  evenly to the pastry.  Baking   Apart from bready croissants and Danish, most pastry doughs contain very  little water, not nearly enough to gelate all the starch granules. Cooking therefore  partly gelates the starch and dries the gluten network well, and produces a firm,  crunchy or crisp texture and a golden brown exterior. Pastry crusts in particular are  cooked at relatively high oven temperatures so that the dough heats through and  sets quickly. Slow heating just melts the pastry dough’s fat, and the protein-starch  network slumps before the starch gets hot enough to absorb water from the  gluten and set the structure.  The filling in open pies and tarts blocks oven heat from reaching the pastry surface  directly, and can prevent the crust from cooking through, so that it ends up pale  and soggy rather than brown and dry. This problem is prevented by precooking  the crust on its own (baking it “blind,” or empty, often with dry beans or ceramic  pie weights to support the dough and prevent slumping). A crisper bottom crust  also results from higher oven temperatures and from putting the container on the  lowest rack or directly on the oven floor. Crispness can be preserved under a moist  filling by sealing the crust surface during precooking with a moisture-resistant  layer of egg yolk or white, or afterwards with cooked-down jams or jellies, or  chocolate, or a moisture-absorbing layer of compatible crumbs.
Crumbly Pastries: Short Pastry, Pâte Brisée  Crumbly but firm pastries are especially prominent in French cooking, where thin  but robust crusts support quiches, various savory pies, and fruit tarts. Where  American pie crusts are too tender to support themselves and are served from the  pan, French tarts are almost always removed from the pan and stand on their own.  In the standard French version of crumbly pastry, pâte brisée, coarse pieces of  butter and egg yolks are placed in the midst of the proper amount of flour, and the  liquid and solids gently worked together with the fingers to form a rough dough.  The dough is then kneaded by pushing it into and along the work surface with the  heel of the hand, an action that disperses the butter finely into the dough. The  butter separates small flour aggregates from each other and prevents them from  forming a continuous, tough mass, while the egg yolks provide moisture, fats, and  proteins that will coagulate during cooking and help hold the flour aggregates  together. The butter may be replaced by vegetable oils, poultry fats — chicken,  duck, goose — and lard and beef tallow, depending on the nature of the filling.  The dough is allowed to rest in the refrigerator to firm its consistency for the  subsequent rolling out and shaping.  Pâte sucrée and pâte sablée — “sugar pastry” and “sandy pastry” — are versions of  crumbly pastry made with sugar. The large proportion of sugar in pâte sablée gives  a distinctly grainy character to the pastry.  One simple way to make crumbly pastry crusts is to start with premade crumbs,  bread or cookie crumbs moistened with fat and simply pressed into the pan before  a quick baking.  Flaky Pastries: American Pie Pastry  The methods for making American-style pie dough produce a crust that is both  tender and flaky. They disperse some of the fat evenly into the dough, separating  small particles from each other, and some coarsely, separating different layers of  the dough from each other. There are various ways to accomplish this. One is to  work the fat into the dry flour in two different stages, the first time finely, the  second in pea-sized pieces. Another is to add the fat all at once, and use the fingers  to fragment and gently rub the chunks down to pea size; the rubbing does the fine  dispersion. (This method works better with shortening than with butter, which  warm   fingers   can   soften   excessively.)   A   small   amount   of   cold   water,   2–4
tablespoons per cup/15–30 gm per 100 gm flour, is then added and the mixture  manipulated very briefly, just until the water is absorbed and a dough forms.  Early American Pie Pastries  American pie pastry is notable for having some of its fat rubbed into the flour  to tenderize, and some rolled in for flakiness. The first American recipes —  Amelia Simmons’s “Puff Pastes for Tarts” — are notable for their terseness and  variety. She gives several; here are three.  No. 1. Rub one pound of butter into one pound of flour, whip 2 whites  and add with cold water and one yolk; make into paste, roll in six or  seven times one pound of butter, flouring it each roll. This is good for  any small thing.  No. 3. To any quantity of flour, rub in three fourths of its weight in  butter (twelve eggs to a peck), rub in one third or half, and roll in the  rest.  No. 8. Rub in one and half pound of suet to six pounds of flour, and a  spoon full of salt, wet with cream, roll in, in six or eight times, two and  half pounds of butter — good for a chicken or meat pie.  —   American Cookery,   1796  The dough is rested in the refrigerator to rechill the fat and let the water become  more evenly distributed, and then is rolled out. The rolling stretches the dough  and thus develops some gluten, and flattens the fat chunks into thin sheets. The  combination creates the layered texture. The rolled dough is then rested to allow  the gluten sheets to relax, and shaped with minimal stretching; otherwise the  gluten may rebound and the crust shrink during baking. In the oven, the sheets of  fat, trapped air, and steam from the dough water (and the water in any butter) all  help to separate the dough into layers and give it a flaky texture.  Shortening and lard generally produce more tender and flaky crusts than butter,  which melts into the dough at a lower temperature and whose water can cause  dough particles and flakes to stick to each other.
Laminated Pastries: Puff Pastry, Pâte Feuilleté  According to the food historian Charles Perry, puff and sheet pastries appear to  have been invented by the Arabs and the Turks respectively, sometime around  1500. Though the aim in both is to produce many layers of very thin pastry, they  involve two very different techniques.  Making   Puff   Pastry   Preparing   puff   pastry   dough   is   elaborate   and   time  consuming. There are several different ways to construct the dough-fat sandwich,  and several different ways to make the folds; here for simplicity I’ll describe the  standard one.  The cook first mixes pastry flour with ice water to make a moderately moist initial  dough, with about 50 parts water per 100 parts flour. Sometimes butter and/or  lemon juices are included to weaken the gluten and make the dough more easily  shaped. The mixing is done with minimal manipulation to minimize gluten  development, which the later rollings-out accomplish. The dough is shaped into a  square.  Now the fat, traditionally butter and weighing about half the initial dough weight  is pounded with a rolling pin until it warms up to about 60ºF/15ºC and becomes  pliable, its consistency matching the consistency of the dough. (Firmer fat would  tear the dough, softer fat would be squeezed out during the later rolling.  Shortenings, with their low water content, produce a lighter and crisper puff  pastry, though a less flavorful one.) The fat is formed into a flat piece, placed on the  dough square, and the combination repeatedly folded onto itself and rolled out,  with turns to vary the direction of rolling and rests in the refrigerator to give the fat  a chance to resolidify and the gluten to relax. The sequence of turning, rolling,  folding, and refrigerating is repeated several times, for a total of six “turns.” With  each rolling out, the gluten becomes more developed, and the dough more elastic  and difficult to shape.  The result of this work, which takes several hours, is a dough made up of 729 layers  of moistened flour separated by 728 layers of fat. (The term   millefeuille,   or  “thousand-leaf,” is applied to a pastry made by stacking two baked pieces of puff  pastry, with a layer of pastry cream in between.) The dough is rested for at least an  hour after the final turn, and then is rolled out for baking to a thickness of about a  quarter   of   an   inch/6   mm.   This   means   that   each   layer   in   the   dough   is  microscopically thin, around a thousandth of an inch or a hundredth of a
millimeter. This is much thinner than paper thin, about the diameter of an  individual starch granule. The dough must be cut with a very sharp knife; a dull  blade will press the many layers together at the edge and restrain their expansion.  When puff pastry is baked in a very hot oven, the expanding air and water vapor  puff the separate layers apart from each other and cause the volume to increase by  four or more times.  Quick Puff Pastry   “Quick” puff pastry, also known as “flaky pastry” (England),  “American” puff pastry, or demi-feuilleté, is a shortcut hybrid of true puff pastry and  American flaky pie pastry. Again there are many versions. Usually some or all of the  fat is cut coarsely into the flour as for pie pastry, cold water added to make a  dough, any remaining fat sandwiched with the dough, and the dough then folded  and rolled out two or three times, with periods of refrigeration to rechill the fat and  relax the gluten.  Even quick puff pastry dough takes a couple of hours to make. Fortunately these  doughs freeze well and are commercially available in frozen form.  Early Recipes for Laminated Pastry: Early English “Puff Paste”  Gervase Markham’s recipe for “puff paste” is a cross between laminated and  sheet pastries.  Now for the making of puff paste of the best kind, you shall take the  finest wheat flour after it hath been a little baked in a pot in the oven,  and blend it well with eggs, whites and yolks all together, after the  paste is well kneaded, roll out a part thereof as thin as you please, and  then spread cold sweet butter over the same, then upon the same  butter roll another leaf of the paste as before; and spread it with butter  also; and thus roll leaf upon leaf with butter between till it be as thick  as you think good: and with it either cover any baked meat, or make  paste for venison, Florentine, tart or what dish else you please and so  bake it.  —   The English Housewife,   1615
Sheet Pastries: Phyllo, Strudel  Unlike puff pastry doughs, sheet pastry doughs are prepared one layer at a time,  and are assembled into pastries with a few dozen layers just before cooking.  Charles Perry speculates that phyllo pastry was invented in Istanbul in the time of  the early Ottoman empire around 1500; it’s now used to make the Eastern  Mediterranean honey-nut sweet baklava, savory turnovers (Turkish boreks), and  many savory pies (Greek spanakopita and others). During the period when the  Ottoman Turks ruled parts of eastern Europe, the phyllo leaf was adopted in  Hungary as   retes   and in Austria as   strudel.  Food Words:   Phyllo, Strudel  Phyllo   is the Greek ancestor of French   feuille   and like it means “leaf.”   Strudel  reflects the unusual rolled form of this version of sheet pastry: it is German for  “eddy” or “whirlpool.”  Phyllo dough is prepared by making a stiff flour-water dough (about 40 parts  water to 100 flour) with a little salt and often some tenderizing acid or oil. The  dough is thoroughly kneaded to develop the gluten, rested overnight, and then  stretched out either in a single mass, or in small balls that are rolled out into a thin  disc, sprinkled with starch, and rolled out again. The dough eventually gets thin  enough to become translucent, around 5 thousandths of an inch/0.1 mm thick.  This is so thin that the silken dough quickly dries out and becomes brittle, so it’s  brushed with oil or melted butter to keep it supple until it’s cut, stacked into a  many-layered pastry, and baked.  The variant of phyllo called strudel is made somewhat differently. The initial dough  is wetter, 55–70 parts water per 100 flour, and contains a small amount of fat and  often whole egg. The dough is kneaded, rested, rolled fairly thin, rested again, and  then gradually stretched with the hands into one large sheet, which is then used as  a wrapper to roll around a variety of savory and sweet preparations.  Both phyllo and strudel doughs are especially tricky to make, and are available  refrigerated and frozen.
Pastry-Bread Hybrids: Croissants, Danish Pastries  Croissants and Danish pastries are made in very much the same way that puff  pastry is. Because the doughs for croissants and Danish pastries are essentially  bread doughs, both moister and softer than puff dough, they are easily torn by  cold, hard fat. The proper consistency of butter or margarine is therefore especially  important in making croissants and Danish pastries.  Croissants   According to Raymond Calvel, croissants first made a splash at the 1889  Paris World’s Fair, where they were one of many kinds of   Wienerbrod,   or Vienna  goods brought from the city that specialized in rich, sweet pastries. The original  croissants were enriched yeast-raised breads shaped into a crescent. It wasn’t until  the 1920s that Parisian bakers had the idea of forming them from a laminated  dough, thus creating a marvelous pastry that is both flaky and moistly, richly,  tenderly bready.  Croissants are made by preparing a firm but malleable dough with minimal  kneading from flour, milk, and yeast; the proportion of liquid is 50–70 parts to 100  flour. Some butter may be added to the dough during mixing to make the dough  more extensible and easily rolled out. In earlier times, the dough was allowed an  initial rise of six to seven hours; today it’s only around one hour. The more time  allowed for fermentation, the fuller the flavor and the lighter the finished pastry.  The risen dough is deflated and chilled, then rolled out, covered with a layer of  butter or pastry margarine, and repeatedly folded, rolled out, and chilled as puff  pastry is, for a total of four to six turns. The finished dough is then rolled out to  around a quarter of an inch/6 mm thick, cut into triangles, the triangles rolled up  into tapered cylinders and allowed a final rise of about an hour at a temperature  cool enough to prevent the fat from melting. When baked, the outer layers of the  dough expand and dry out to form flaky, puff pastry–like sheets, while the inner  layers remain moist and bake into exquisitely delicate sheets of bread, translucent  and pebbled with tiny bubbles.  Danish Pastries   What Americans call “Danish” pastries also originated as Vienna  goods, but were introduced to the United States via Copenhagen. In the 19th  century, Danish bakers took a basic Viennese enriched bread dough and added  even more layering butter, thus making a lighter, crisper pastry than the original.  They also used the dough to surround a variety of fillings, notably   remonce   (butter  creamed with sugar and often including some form of almonds). Danish pastries
are made in essentially the same way as croissants. The initial dough is moister and  softer, includes sugar and also whole eggs, so it’s sweeter, richer, and distinctively  yellow, and it isn’t given an initial rising. Often more butter or margarine is used for  the laminations, and the dough may only be turned three times, so the layers are  fewer and thicker. Danish pastry dough is often used as a container for sweet or  rich fillings, or rolled out, covered with a combination of nuts, raisins or flavored  sugar, rolled up, and cut into spiral cross-sections. Once the final pastry is formed,  it’s allowed to rise until about doubled in volume (again, at temperatures that keep  the shortening solid), and then is baked.  Tender Savory Pastry: Hot-Water Pastry, Pâte À pâté  Hot-water pastry, or pâté pastry, is unlike the other pastries. Its original purpose in  medieval times was to provide a sturdy container for meat dishes meant to be kept  for some time (p. 560). Today it’s used to enclose meat pâtés, to make meat pies,  and sometimes as an alternative to puff pastry that surrounds the tenderloin in  beef Wellington and the salmon in coulibiac. It is easily rolled out and formed into  a container, able to retain juices released during cooking, yet tender to both knife  and tooth. It’s made with a relatively large amount of water — 50 parts per 100  flour — and about 35 parts lard. The water and lard are heated together near the  boil, and the flour is then added, the mixture stirred just until it forms a  homogeneous   mass,   then   rested. The   large   proportion   of   fat   limits   gluten  development, thus providing tenderness, and also acts as a kind of water repellant,  thus providing a barrier against cooking juices. The precooking swells and gelates  some of the flour starch, which takes up water and gives the dough a thick,  workable consistency in place of an elastic gluten structure.  Cookies  Common cookies are simple pleasures, but the microcosm of all cookies is a  summa   of the baker’s art. Cookies include sweet bitesized baked goods of all sorts:  crumbly   and   laminated   pastries,   wafers,   butter   and   sponge   cakes,   biscuits,  meringues, nut pastes. The term comes from the medieval Dutch for “little cake.”  The French equivalent is   petits fours,   or “little oven goods,” and the German   klein  Gebäck   means much the same. Their miniature size and the numerous possibilities  for shaping, decorating, and flavoring have resulted in a great diversity of cookies,
many of them developed by the French and named in the same spirit that gave us  Italian pastas called butterflies, little worms, and priest-stranglers: hence cat’s  tongues, Russian cigarettes, eyeglasses, and Nero’s ears.  Cookie Ingredients and Textures  Most cookies are both sweet and rich, with substantial proportions of sugar and  fat. They’re also tender, thanks to ingredients, proportions, and mixing techniques  that minimize the formation of a gluten network. But then they may be moist or  dry, crumbly or flaky or crisp or chewy. The diversity of textures arises from a  handful of ingredients, and from the proportions and methods of combining them.  Flour   Most cookies are made with pastry or all-purpose flour, but both bread flour  and cake flour produce doughs and batters that spread less (thanks respectively to  more gluten and more absorbant starch). A high proportion of flour to water, as in  shortbread and pastry-dough cookies, limits both gluten development and starch  gelation — as little as 20% of the starch in some dry cookies is gelated — and  produces a crumbly texture. A high proportion of water to flour, as in batter-based  cookies, dilutes gluten proteins, allows extensive starch gelation, and produces  either a soft, cakelike texture or a crisp, crunchy one, depending on the method  and how much moisture is baked out of the cookie. For doughs that need to hold  their shape during baking — those rolled out and stamped with a cookie cutter —  a high flour content and some gluten development are necessary. The baker gives  fluid batters some solidity by chilling them, and then shapes them by extruding  them through a pastry pipe or setting them in molds.  A coarser but more fragile backbone can be created by replacing some or all of the  flour with ground nuts, as in classic macaroons made only with egg whites, sugar,  and almonds.  Sugar   Sugar makes several contributions to cookie structure and texture. When  creamed with the fat, or beaten with egg, it introduces air bubbles into the mix  and lightens the texture. It competes with the flour starch for water, and raises the  starch gelation temperature nearly to the boiling point: so it adds hardness and  crispness. A large proportion of pure table sugar, sucrose, contributes to hardness  in another way. The proportion of sugar in some cookie doughs is so high that only  about half the sugar dissolves in the limited amount of moisture. When the dough  heats up during baking, more sugar can dissolve, and the added liquid causes the
cookie to soften and spread. Then when the cookie cools, some of the sugar  recrystallizes, and the initially soft cookie develops a distinctive snap — a process  that may take a day or two. Other forms of sugar — honey, molasses, corn syrup —  tend to absorb water rather than crystallize (chapter 12), so when heated they  form a syrup that permeates the cookie, helps it to spread, and firms as it cools,  making it moist and chewy.  Eggs   Eggs generally provide most of the water in a cookie mix, as well as proteins  that help bind the flour particles together and coagulate during baking to add  solidity. The fat and emulsifiers in the yolk enrich and moisten. The higher the  proportion of whole eggs or yolks in a recipe, the more cake-like the texture.  Fat   Fat provides richness, moistness, and suppleness. When it melts during  cooking, it lubricates the solid particles of flour and sugar and encourages the  cookie to spread and thin — a quality that is sometimes desirable, sometimes not.  Because butter melts at a lower temperature than margarine or shortening, it gives  cookies more time to spread before the protein and starch set. Butter is about 15%  water, and is the main or only source of moisture in such low-egg recipes as  shortbread and tea cookies.  Leavening   Leavening, whether tiny bubbles of air or of carbon dioxide, helps  tenderize cookies, and encourages them to puff. Many cookies are leavened only  with air bubbles incorporated when the sugar is creamed with the fat, or beaten  with the eggs. Some are supplemented with chemical leavenings. Alkaline baking  soda may be used when the dough includes such acid ingredients as honey, brown  sugar, and cake flour.  Some Cookie Doughs and Batters: Ingredients and Typical Proportions  Cookie   Flour  Total  Water   Eggs   Butter   Sugar  Chemical  Leavening  Shortbread  (crumbly)  100   15   100   33   —  Biscotti (crunchy  after drying)  100   35   45   60   yes
Cookie   Flour  Total  Water   Eggs   Butter   Sugar  Chemical  Leavening  Chocolate chip  (cakey)  100   38   33   85   100   yes  Tuiles, wafers (crisp)   100   80   80   50   135   —  Pastry doughs  Short: Sables  (crumbly)  100   25   22   50   50   —  Puff: Palmiers (flaky)   100   35   75   (toppi  ng)  —  Creamed-butter batters  Tea cookies  (crumbly)  100   25   18  ( whi-  tes )  70   45   —  Lady wafers, cat's  tongue (delicate,  crisp)  100   90   100   100   100   —  Russian cigarette  (thin, crisp)  100   180   180  ( whi-  tes )  140   180   —  Spongecake batters  Ladyfingers (light,  dry)  100   150   200   —   100  Madeleines (soft,  moist, cakey)  100   145   170   110   110   (yes)
Making and Keeping Cookies  There are as many ways to prepare cookies as there are ways to produce cakes and  pastries — and then some. The standard American categories are:  •   Drop cookies , formed from a soft dough that is portioned by spoonfuls onto  the baking sheet, where they spread out during baking. Chocolate chip and  oatmeal cookies are examples.  •   Cut-out cookies , formed from a stiffer dough that holds its shape. The dough  is rolled out and porcookietioned with a cookie cutter; baking sets the  cookies in their original shape. Sugar cookies and butter cookies are  examples.  •   Hand-shaped cookies , formed from batters that are stiffened by chilling and  then carefully piped or molded for baking. Examples are ladyfingers and  madeleines.  •   Bar cookies , shaped after baking, not before. They’re cut from the thin cake-  like mass produced when the batter is baked in a shallow pan. Date and nut  bars and brownies are examples.  •   Icebox cookies , formed by slicing cross-sections from a premade cylinder of  dough kept in the refrigerator for use when needed. Many cookie doughs  can be treated this way.  Thanks to their small size, thinness, and high sugar content, cookies quickly brown  at oven temperatures. Their bottoms and edges may get too dark while the centers  finish   cooking,   a   problem   that   can   be   minimized   by   lowering   the   oven  temperature and using light baking sheets that reflect radiant heat, rather than  dark ones that absorb it. Slight underbaking helps produce a moister, chewier  texture. Immediately after baking, many cookies are soft and malleable, a fact that  allows the cook to shape thin wafer cookies into flower-like cups, rolled cylinders,  and arched tiles that then stiffen as they cool.  With their low water content, cookies are especially prone to losing their texture  during storage. Crisp, dry cookies absorb moisture from the air and get soft; moist,  chewy cookies lose moisture and become dry. Cookies are therefore best stored in  an airtight container. With their low moisture and high sugar levels, they are not  very hospitable to microbes, and keep well.
Pasta, Noodles, and Dumplings  One of the simplest preparations of cereal flour gave us one of the most popular  foods in the world: pasta. The word is Italian for “paste” or “dough,” and pasta is  nothing more than wheat flour and water combined to make a clay-like mass,  formed into small pieces, and boiled in water until cooked through — not baked,  as are nearly all other doughs.   Noodle   comes from the German word for the same  preparation, and generally refers to pasta-like preparations made outside the  Italian   tradition. The   keys   to   pasta’s   appeal   are   its   moist,   fine,   satisfyingly  substantial texture and its neutral flavor, which makes it a good partner for a broad  range of other ingredients.  Two cultures in the world have thoroughly explored the possibilities of boiled  grain paste: Italy and China. Their discoveries were different, and complementary.  In Italy, the availability of high-gluten durum wheat led to the development of a  sturdy, protein-rich pasta, one that can be dried and stored indefinitely, one that  readily lent itself to industrial manufacturing, and that can be formed into  hundreds of fanciful shapes. The Italians also refined the art of making fresh pastas  from soft wheat flours, and evolved an entire branch of cooking based on pasta as  the principal ingredient, its combination of substance and tenderness providing  the foundation for flavorful sauces — usually just enough to coat the surfaces —  and fillings. In China, which had soft, low-gluten wheats, cooks concentrated on  simple long noodles and thin wrappers, prepared them fresh and by hand,  sometimes with great panache and just moments before cooking, and served the  soft, slippery results almost exclusively in large amounts of thin broth. More  remarkably, Chinese cooks found ways to make noodles from many different  materials, including other grains and even pure, protein-free starch from beans  and root vegetables.  The History of Pasta and Noodles  It’s a story often told, and often refuted, that the medieval traveler Marco Polo  found noodles in China and introduced them to Italy. A recent book by Silvano  Serventi and Françoise Sabban has set the record straight in OWNERitative and  fascinating detail. China was indeed the first country to develop the art of noodle  making, but there were pastas in the Mediterranean world long before Marco Polo.
Noodles in China   Despite the fact that wheat was grown in the Mediterranean  region long before it arrived in China, the northern Chinese appear to have been  the first to develop the art of noodle making, sometime before 200   BCE . Around 300  CE , Shu Xi wrote an ode to wheat products ( bing ) that names several kinds of  noodles and dumplings, describes how they’re made, and suggests their luxurious  qualities: poets frequently likened their appearance and texture to the qualities of  silk (see box, p. 572). In 544, an agricultural treatise called   Important Arts for the  People’s Welfare   devoted an entire chapter to dough products. These included not  only several different shapes of wheat noodle, most made by mixing flour with  meat broth and one made with egg, but also noodles made from rice flour and  even from pure starch (p. 579).  China also invented filled pasta, the original ravioli, in which the dough surrounds  and encloses a mass of other ingredients. Both small, thin-skinned, delicate  hundun   or wontons, now usually served in southern soups, and the thicker   chiao-  tzu   or pot sticker, often steamed and fried in the north, are mentioned in written  records before 700   CE , and archaeologists have found well-preserved specimens  that date to the 9th century. Over the next few hundred years, recipes describe  making thin noodles by slicing a rolled dough sheet and by repeatedly pulling and  folding a dough rope; and the doughs themselves are made with a variety of  liquids, including radish and leaf juices, vegetable purees, juice pressed from raw  shrimp (which makes the noodles pink), and sheep’s blood.  Noodles —   mian   or   mein   — and filled dumplings began in the north as luxury  foods for the ruling class. They gradually became staples of the working class, with  dumplings retaining the suggestion of prosperity, and spread to the south around  the 12th century. Noodles made their way to Japan by the 7th or 8th century,  where several kinds of   men   evolved (p. 578).  Dumplings and Noodles in Early China  Flour sifted twice,  Flying snow of white powder,  In a stretchy, sticky dough
Kneaded with water or broth, it becomes shiny.  …  Then water is set to boil over the fire,  Waiting for the steam to rise,  We hitch up our clothes,  we roll up our sleeves,  And we knead, and we shape, and we smooth, and we stretch.  Finally the dough detaches from our fingers,  Under the palm it is perfectly rolled out in all directions  And without a break in the haste and hurry  The stars separate and the hailstones fall.  In the basket, no spattered stuffing.  On the   bing   not a trace of extra dough.  Perfectly lined up, of great beauty,  Without breaking, the dough is fine and thin.  It swells so that one can guess at the stuffing below,  Soft as silk floss in the springtime,  White as autumn silk, cooked just in time.  — Shu Xi, “Ode to   Bing, ” ca. 300, transl. Antony Shugaar  Pasta in the Middle East and Mediterranean   Far to the west of China, in the  homeland of wheat, the earliest indications of pasta-like preparations come in the  6th century. A 9th century Syrian text gives the Arabic name   itriya   to a preparation  of semolina dough shaped into strings and dried. In 11th-century Paris, mention is  made of vermicelli, or “little worms.” In the 12th century — around 200 years before  Marco Polo’s travels — the Arab geographer Idrisi reported that the Sicilians made  thread-like   itriya   and exported them. The Italian term   macaroni   first appeared in  the 13th century and was applied to various shapes, from flat to lumpy. Medieval  cooks made some pastas from fermented doughs; they cooked pasta for an hour
or more until it was very moist and soft; they frequently paired it with cheese, and  used it to wrap around fillings.  Pasta, Cheese, and Wine Without End  By the time of the great storyteller Giovanni Boccaccio, who died in 1375,  pasta was familiar enough in Italy to be part of a glutton’s paradise:  in a country called Bengodi…there was a mountain made entirely of  grated Parmesan cheese, on which lived people who did nothing but  make macaroni and ravioli and cook them in capon broth. And then  they threw them down, and the more of them you took, the more you  had. And nearby ran a rivulet of white wine whose better was never  drunk, and without a drop of water in it.  —   Decameron , Day 8, Tale 3  The postmedieval evolution of pasta took place largely in Italy. Pasta makers  formed guilds and made fresh types from soft wheat flour throughout Italy, dried  types from durum semolina in the south and in Sicily. Italian cooks developed the  distinctive preparation style called   pastasciutta   or “dry pasta,” pasta served as the  main component of the dish, moistened with sauce but not drowning in it or  dispersed in a soup or stew. With its ideal climate for drying raw noodles, a tricky  process that took one to four weeks, Naples became the center of durum pasta  manufacturing.  Thanks to the mechanization of dough kneading and extrusion, by the 18th  century durum pasta had become street food in Naples, and common in much of  Italy. Perhaps because street vendors minimized cooking and open-air consumers  enjoyed chewing on something substantial, it was in Naples that people began to  prefer pasta cooked for minutes rather than hours, so that it retains some firmness.  This practice spread to the rest of the country in the late 19th century, and the  term   al dente,   or cooked “to the tooth,” appeared after World War I. Subsequent  decades brought effective artificial drying and the machinery and understanding  necessary to turn pasta making from a batch-by-batch process to a continuous  one. Dried durum pasta is now made on an industrial scale in many countries. In
addition, modern heat treatments and vacuum-packing have also made it possible  to keep fresh pasta for several weeks in the refrigerator.  Recent decades have brought a revival in Italy of small-scale manufacturing using  selected wheat varieties, old-fashioned extrusion dies that produce a rough, sauce-  holding surface, and longer-time, low-temperature drying that is said to produce a  finer flavor.  Making Pasta and Noodle Doughs  Basic Ingredients and Methods   The aim in making pasta and noodle dough is to  transform dry flour particles into a cohesive mass that is malleable enough to be  shaped into thin strips, but strong enough to stay intact when boiled. With wheat  flours, the cohesiveness is provided by the gluten proteins. Durum wheats have  the advantage of a high gluten content, and a gluten that is less elastic than bread-  wheat gluten and so easier to roll out. Water normally makes up around 30% of the  dough weight, compared to 40% or more for bread doughs.  After the ingredients are mixed and briefly kneaded into a homogenous but stiff  mass, pasta dough is rested to allow the flour particles to absorb the water and the  gluten network to develop. With time the dough becomes noticeably easier to  work, and the finished noodles end up with a cohesive consistency rather than a  crumbly one. The dough is then rolled gently and repeatedly to form an ever  thinner sheet. This gradual sheeting presses out air bubbles that weaken the  dough structure, and organizes the gluten network, compressing and aligning the  protein fibers, but also spreading them out so that the dough becomes more easily  stretched without snapping back.  Egg Pasta and Fresh Pasta   Noodles made from standard bread wheat and eggs  are preferred in much of northern Europe, and most fresh pastas sold in the United  States are of this type. Eggs perform two functions in noodles. One is to enhance  color and richness. Here the yolk is the primary factor, and yolks alone can be used;  their fat content also makes the dough more delicate and the noodles tender. The  second function is to provide additional protein for moderate-protein flours used  in both home and industrial production. The egg white proteins make the dough  and noodles more cohesive and firm, reduce the gelation and leaking of starch  granules, and reduce cooking losses. In U.S. commercial noodles, dried egg is  added at 5–10% of the weight of the flour. In Italy, Alsace, Germany, and in
specialty and homemade noodles in the United States, fresh eggs are used, and in  larger proportions. They may be the only source of water in the dough. Some  pastas from the Piedmont region in northwest Italy contain as many as 18 yolks per  pound of flour/40 yolks per kg.  To make egg pasta, the ingredients are mixed in proportions that give a stiff  dough; the dough is kneaded until smooth, allowed to rest and relax, rolled out,  and then cut into the desired shapes. The fresh pasta is perishable, and if made  with eggs carries a slight possibility of salmonella contamination; it should be  cooked immediately or wrapped and refrigerated. Prolonged drying at kitchen  temperature may allow microbes to multiply to hazardous levels. Fresh pasta cooks  quickly, in a few seconds or minutes depending on thickness.  Dried Durum Pasta   The standard Italian pastas, and Italian-style pastas from  around the world, are made from durum wheat, with its distinctive flavor,  attractive yellow color, and abundant gluten proteins. Durum pastas are seldom  made with eggs. Their gluten proteins give the dried noodles a hard, glassy  interior; during cooking they limit the loss of dissolved proteins and gelated starch,  and make a firm noodle.  Making Durum Pasta Dough and Shapes   Durum pasta is made from   semolina,  which is milled durum endosperm with a characteristically coarse particle size,  0.15–0.5 mm across, thanks to the hard nature of durum endosperm (finer grinding  causes excessive damage to starch granules). Flat pasta shapes are punched from  out of a sheet of dough. Long noodles and short thick ones are formed by  extruding the dough through the holes of a die at high pressure. The movement,  pressure, and heat of extrusion change the structure of the dough by shearing the  protein network apart, mixing it more intimately with starch granules that have  been partly gelated by the heat and pressure, and allowing broken protein bonds  to re-form and stabilize the new network. Noodles extruded through modern low-  friction Teflon dies end up with a glossier, smoother surface, with fewer pores and  cracks through which hot water can leak in and dissolved starch can leak out. They  generally lose less starch to the cooking water, absorb less cooking water, and  therefore have a firmer texture than the same noodle extruded through a  traditional bronze die. Proponents of traditional dies prefer the rougher surface,  which they say better retains the sauce in the finished dish.  Drying Durum Pasta   Before the invention of mechanical driers, manufacturers
held the new pasta at ambient temperatures and humidities for days or weeks.  Early industrial driers operated at 100–140ºF/ 40–60ºC and took about a day.  Modern drying takes only two to five hours and involves rapid predrying at or  above 185ºF/84ºC, and then a more extended phase of drying and resting periods.  The modern high-temperature method rapidly inactivates enzymes that can  destroy the yellow xanthophyll pigments and cause brown discoloration, and it  cross-links some of the gluten protein and produces a firmer, less sticky cooked  noodle. However, proponents of slow drying say that high heat also damages  flavor.  Cooking Pasta and Noodles  When pasta is cooked in water, the protein network and starch granules absorb  water and expand, the outer protein layer is ruptured, and the dissolving starch  escapes into the cooking water. Deeper within the noodle there’s less water  available, so the starch granules aren’t completely disrupted: the center of the  noodle therefore stays more intact than the surface. Cooking pasta   al dente   means  stopping the cooking when the center   of the noodle still remains slightly  underdone and offers some resistance to chewing; at this point, the noodle surface  is 80–90% water, the center 40–60% (somewhat moister than freshly baked bread).  Pasta is sometimes cooked just short of this point and then finished in the sauce  that will dress it.  Cooking Water   It’s generally recommended that pasta be cooked in 10 or more  times its weight of vigorously boiling water (around 5 quarts or liters water per  pound/500 gm). This allows for the pasta’s absorption of 1.6–1.8 times its weight,  and leaves plenty to dilute the starch that escapes during cooking, and to separate  the noodles from each other so that they cook evenly and without sticking. Hard  water — water that is alkaline and contains calcium and magnesium ions —  increases both cooking losses and stickiness in noodles (it probably weakens the  protein-starch film at the noodle surface, and the ions act as a glue to bond noodle  surfaces to each other). Most city tap water has been made alkaline to reduce pipe  corrosion, so pasta cooking water can often be improved by adding some form of  acid (lemon juice, cream of tartar, citric acid) to adjust the pH to a slightly acidic 6.
Cooking pasta. Left: Uncooked pasta dough consists of raw starch granules embedded  in a matrix of gluten protein. Right: When pasta is cooked in water, starch granules at  and near the noodle surface absorb water, swell, soften, and release some dissolved  starch into the cooking water. In pasta done al dente, hot water has penetrated to the  center of the noodle, but the starch granules there have absorbed relatively little, and  the starch-gluten matrix remains firm.  Stickiness   Noodles stick to each other during cooking when they’re allowed to  rest close to each other just after they’re added to the cooking water. Their dry  surfaces absorb the small amount of water between them so there’s none left for  lubrication, and the partly gelated surface starch glues the noodles together.  Sticking can be minimized by constantly stirring the noodles for the first few  minutes of cooking, or by adding a spoonful or two of oil to the pot and then  lifting the noodles through the water surface a few times to lubricate them. Salt in  the cooking water not only flavors the noodles, but limits starch gelation and so  reduces cooking losses and stickiness.  Stickiness after cooking is caused by surface starch that dries out and cools down  after the noodles have been drained, and develops a gluey consistency. It can be  minimized by rinsing the drained noodles, or moistening them with some sauce,  cooled cooking water, oil, or butter.
Couscous, Dumplings, Spätzle, Gnocchi  Couscous   Couscous is an elegantly simple pasta that appears to have been  invented by the Berber peoples of northern Algeria and Morocco between the  11th and 13th centuries. It remains a staple dish in North Africa, the Middle East,  and Sicily. In its traditional form, couscous is made by sprinkling salted water into a  bowl containing whole wheat flour, then stirring with the fingers to form little bits  of dough. The bits are rubbed between the hands and sieved to obtain granules of  uniform size, usually 1–3 mm in diameter. There is no kneading and therefore no  gluten development, so this gentle technique can be and is applied to many other  grains. Couscous granules are small enough that they can be cooked not in a large  excess of water but in steam (traditionally over the fragrant stew that it will  accompany), which allows them to develop a uniquely light, delicate texture.  Couscous works best with thin sauces that spread easily over the large surface area  of the small granules.  “Israeli” or “large” couscous is actually an extruded pasta invented in Israel in the  1950s. It’s made from a dough of hard wheat flour formed into balls a few  millimeters in diameter and lightly toasted in an oven to add depth to the flavor.  It’s cooked and served in the same ways as pasta and rice.  Dumplings and Spätzle   Western dumplings and Spätzle (a word in a Bavarian  dialect meaning “clod, clump,” not “sparrow” as is often said) are essentially coarse,  informal portions of dough or batter that are dropped into a pot of boiling water  and cooked through, and served as is in a stew or braise or sautéed to accompany  a meat dish. Unlike pasta doughs, dumpling doughs are minimally kneaded to  maximize tenderness, and benefit from the inclusion of tiny air pockets, which  provide lightness. The progress of cooking is judged by the position of the  dumpling in the pot; when it rises to the top, it’s considered almost done, given  another minute or so, and then scooped out. This tendency to rise with cooking is  due to the expansion of the dough’s air pockets, which fill with vaporized water as  the dumpling interior approaches the boiling point and make the dough less  dense than the surrounding water.  Gnocchi   Gnocchi — the word is Italian and means “lumps” — got their start in the  1300s as ordinary dumplings made from bread crumbs or flour (Roman gnocchi  are still made by baking squares of a cooked dough of milk and semolina). But with  the arrival of the New World’s potato, Italian cooks transformed gnocchi into a form
of dumpling with an unusually light texture. The starchy potato flesh became the  main, tender ingredient, with just enough flour added to absorb moisture and  provide gluten to hold it together into a formable dough. Eggs are sometimes  added to provide additional binding and yolky richness, though they also add a  springy quality. Old potatoes, and mealy rather than waxy varieties, are preferred  for their lower water and higher starch contents, which means that less flour is  needed to make the dough, so less gluten forms and the dumpling is more tender.  The potatoes are cooked, peeled, and riced immediately to allow as much moisture  as possible to evaporate; then cooled or even chilled, and kneaded into a dough  with just as much flour as necessary, usually less than 1 cup/120 gm per lb/500 gm  potatoes. The dough is formed into a thin rope and cut into small pieces, the  pieces shaped, and then boiled in water until they rise to the top of the pot.  Gnocchi can also be made by replacing the potato with other starchy vegetables  or with ricotta cheese.  Asian Wheat Noodles and Dumplings  Two very different families of noodles are made in Asia. Starch noodles are  described below. Asian wheat noodles — Chinese   mian   — bear some resemblance  to European pastas made from bread wheat. They’re typically made from low-or  moderate-protein flours, and are formed not by extrusion but by sheeting and  cutting or by stretching. The most spectacular form of noodle production is that of  Shanghai’s hand-pulled noodles,   la mian,   for which the maker starts with a thick  rope of dough, swings, twists, and stretches it to arms’ length, brings the ends  together to make the one strand into two — and repeats the stretching and  folding as many as eleven times to make up to 4,096 thin noodles! Asian noodles  are both elastic and soft, their texture created by both their weak gluten and by  amylopectin-rich starch granules. Salt, usually at around 2% of the noodle weight,  is an important ingredient in Asian noodles. It tightens the gluten network and  stabilizes the starch granules, keeping them intact even as they absorb water and  swell.
Soba: Japanese Buckwheat Noodles  Buckwheat noodles were made in northern China in the 14th century, and  had become a popular food in Japan by around 1600. It’s difficult to make  noodles exclusively with buckwheat flour because the buckwheat proteins do  not form a cohesive gluten. Japanese   soba   noodles may be from 10% to 90%  buckwheat, the remainder wheat. They’re traditionally made from freshly  milled flour, which is mixed very quickly with the water and worked until the  water is evenly absorbed and the dough firm and smooth. Salt is omitted  because it interferes with the proteins and mucilage that help bind the dough  (p. 483). The dough is rested, then rolled out to about 3 mm thick and rested  again, then cut into fine noodles. The noodles are cooked fresh, and when  done, are washed and firmed in a container of ice water, drained, and served  either in a hot broth or cold, accompanied by a dipping sauce.  Chinese Wheat Noodles and Dumplings  White and Yellow Noodles   Salted white noodles arose in northern China and are  now most widely known in their Japanese version, udon (below). Yellow noodles,  which are made with alkaline salts, appear to have originated in southeast China  sometime before 1600, and then spread with Chinese migrants to Indonesia,  Malaysia, and Thailand. The yellowness of the traditional noodles (modern ones are  sometimes colored with egg yolks) is caused by phenolic compounds in the flour  called flavones, which are normally colorless but become yellow in alkaline  conditions. The flavones are especially concentrated in the bran and germ, so less  refined flours develop a deeper color. Because they’re based on harder wheats,  southern yellow noodles have a firmer texture than white salted noodles, and  alkalinity (pH 9–11, the equivalent of old egg whites) increases this firmness. The  alkaline salts (sodium and potassium carbonates at 0.5–1% of noodle weight) also  cause the noodles to take longer to cook and absorb more water, and they  contribute a characteristic aroma and taste.  Dumplings   The Chinese version of filled pasta is thin sheets of wheat-flour dough  enclosing seasoned morsels of meat, shellfish, or vegetables. Some doughs are  simply made from flour and water, but robust pot-sticker dough is made by boiling
part of the water before adding the flour, so that some of the starch is gelated and  contributes to the dough’s cohesiveness. The formed dumplings may be steamed,  boiled, fried, or deep-fried.  Japanese Wheat Noodles   The standard thick Japanese noodles (2–4 mm in  diameter), called   udon,   are descendents of the Chinese white salted noodle.  They’re white and soft and made from soft wheat flour, water, and salt.   Ra-men  noodles are light yellow and somewhat stiff, and are made from hard wheat flour,  water, and alkaline salts ( kansui ). Very thin noodles (around 1 mm) are called   so-  men.   Japanese noodles are usually cooked in water of pH 5.5–6, which is often  adjusted by adding some acid. After cooking, the noodles are drained and washed  and cooled in running water, which causes the surface starch to set into a moist,  slippery, nonsticky layer.  The Japanese instant version of Chinese-style noodles,   ra-men,   was born in1958.  They’re manufactured by making thin, quickly rehydrated noodles, then steaming  them, frying them at 280ºF/ 140ºC, and air-drying at 180ºF/80ºC.  Tapioca  Tapioca pearls, which are widely used to absorb moisture and flavor, thicken  puddings and pie fillings, and nowadays to provide chewy “bubbles” in teas  and other drinks, are translucent, glossy, and elastic, and based on the same  principle as the starch noodle. They are spheres 1–6 mm across made up of  tapioca starch granules held together by a matrix of gelatinized tapioca starch  (about 17% amylose). A wet mass of the starch granules (40–50% water by  weight) is broken up into coarse grains, and the grains then fed into rotating  pans, where they roll around and gradually agglomerate into little balls.  They’re then steamed until a little more than half the starch is gelated, mostly  in the outer layer, and then are dried, so that a firm retrograded starch matrix  forms. When cooked in liquid, they soak up water and the rest of their starch  gelates while the retrograded matrix maintains their structure.
Asian Starch and Rice Noodles  All the pastas we’ve looked at so far are held together by the gluten proteins of  wheat flour. Starch and rice noodles contain no gluten whatsoever. Starch noodles  in particular are a remarkable, even startling invention: unlike all other noodles,  they’re translucent. They’re often called glass or cellophane noodles, and in Japan  are given the lovely name   harusame,   “spring rain” noodles.  Starch Noodles   Dried noodles made out of pure starch — usually from mung  beans (China), rice (Japan), or sweet potato — are prized for several qualities: their  clarity and glossy brilliance, their slippery, firm texture, and their readiness for  eating after just a few minutes of soaking in hot liquid, whether plain hot water or  a soup or braised dish.  The firmest noodles are made from starches high in the straight-chain amylose  form (p. 457). Where ordinary long-grain rice is 21–23% amylose, special noodle  rices are 30–36%, and mung-bean starch is 35–40% amylose. Starch noodles are  made by first cooking a small amount of dry starch with water to make a sticky  paste that will bind the rest of the starch into a cohesive dough. The paste is mixed  with the rest of the dry starch and more water to make a dough with 35–45%  moisture, and the dough is then extruded through small holes in a metal plate to  form noodles. The noodles are immediately boiled to gelate all the starch and form  a continuous network of starch molecules throughout, and then are drained and  held at the ambient temperature or chilled for 12–48 hours before being air-dried.  During the holding period, the gelated starch molecules fall into a more orderly  arrangement, or retrograde (p. 458). The smaller   amylose   molecules   cluster  together to form junctions in the network, crystalline regions that resist disruption  even by boiling temperatures. The dried noodles are thus firm and strong, but the  less orderly parts of the network readily absorb hot liquid and swell to become  tender without the need for active cooking.  Starch noodles are translucent because they’re a uniform mixture of starch and  water, with no particles of insoluble protein or intact starch granules to scatter  light rays.  Rice Noodles and Wrappers   Like starch noodles, rice noodles are held together  by amylose, not gluten; but because they contain protein and cell-wall particles  that scatter light, they’re opaque rather than translucent. Rice noodles are made by  soaking high-amylose rice in water, grinding it into a paste, cooking the paste so
that much but not all of the starch is gelated, kneading the paste into a dough and  extruding it to form noodles, steaming the noodles to finish the gelation process,  cooling and holding for 12 hours or more, and drying with hot air or by frying  them in oil. Again, the holding and drying cause starch retrogradation and the  formation of a structure that stands up to rehydration in hot water. Fresh rice  noodles,   chow fun,   need no rehydration before being stir-fried.  Rice papers,   banh trang   in Vietnamese, are thin, parchment-like discs that are used  as wrappers for southeast Asian versions of the spring roll. They’re made by  soaking and grinding rice, soaking it again, pounding it into a paste and spreading  it into a thin layer, steaming it and then drying it. Rice papers are rehydrated briefly  in lukewarm water, then used immediately as wrappers that can be eaten fresh or  fried.   Object 10
Sauces  Sauces are liquids that accompany the primary ingredient in a dish. Their purpose  is to enhance the flavor of that ingredient — a portion of meat or fish or grain or  vegetable — either by deepening and broadening its own intrinsic flavor, or by  providing a contrast or complement to it. While the meat or grain or vegetable is  always more or less itself, a sauce can be anything the cook wants it to be, and  makes the dish a richer, more various, more satisfying composition. Sauces help  the cook feed our perpetual hunger for stimulating sensations, for the pleasures of  taste and smell, touch and sight. Sauces are distillations of desire.  The word   sauce   comes from an ancient root word meaning “salt,” which is the  original concentrated flavoring, pure mineral crystals from the sea (p. 639). Our  primary foods — animal flesh, grains and breads and pastas, starchy vegetables —  are pretty bland, and cooks have found or invented a vast range of ingredients  with which to make them more flavorful. The simplest are   seasonings   provided by  nature: salt, pungent black pepper and chillis, sour juices of unripe fruits, sweet  honey and sugar, distinctively aromatic herbs and spices. More complex are  prepared   condiments,   many   of   them   foods   preserved   and   transformed   by  fermentation: sour and aromatic vinegar, salty and savory soy sauce and fish sauce,  salty and sour pickles, pungent and sour mustard, sweet and sour and fruity  ketchup. And then there are s   auces,   the ultimate composed flavorings. The cook  conceives and prepares sauces for particular dishes, and can give them any flavor.  They always include seasonings, sometimes condiments, and sometimes artfully  intensified flavors of the primary foods themselves, or of other foods, or of the  cooking process.  In addition to their heightened flavor, sauces give tactile pleasure by the way they  move in the mouth. Cooks construct sauces to have a consistency somewhere  between the resistant solidity of animal or plant tissues and the elusive thinness of  water. This is the consistency of luscious ripe fruit that melts in the mouth and  seems to feed us willingly, and of the fats that give a persistent, moist fullness to  animal flesh and to cream and butter. The fluidity of a sauce allows it to coat the  solid food evenly and lend it a pleasing moistness, while the substantial, lingering  quality helps the sauce cling to the food and to our tongue and palate as well,
prolonging the experience of its flavor and providing a sensation of richness.  A last pleasure that a sauce can provide is an attractive appearance. Many sauces  are nondescript, but others have the vibrant color of their parent fruit or vegetable,  or the depth of tone that comes with roasting and long cooking. Some have an  attractive sheen, and some are intriguingly transparent. The visual beauty of a  sauce is a sign of the care with which it was made, a suggestion of intensity and  clarity of flavor and of presence on the tongue: an anticipation of pleasures to  come.  There are several basic ways of making sauces. Many of them involve disrupting  organized plant and animal tissues and freeing the juices that carry their flavor.  Once extracted from their source, the juices can be combined with other flavorful  materials, and then often benefit from thickening to help them linger on the food  and in the mouth. The cook thickens juices by filling them with a variety of large  molecules or particles that obstruct the flow of the water molecules. Most of this  chapter deals with different thickening methods and their applications.  Sauces are closely related to two other basic preparations.   Soups   are also liquid  foods of various consistencies, and may differ from sauces only in being somewhat  less concentrated in flavor, so that they can be eaten as a food in themselves, not  an accent. And   jellies   are thickened liquids with enough gelatin in them to set at  room temperature, thus becoming a temporarily solid food that melts into a sauce  in the mouth.  The History of Sauces In europe  Europe is just one of several regions in the world that have evolved sauces with  broad appeal in modern times. Many sauces are now popular far from their  birthplaces, among them Chinese soy-based sauces, Indian sauces thickened and  flavored with spices, and Mexican salsas and chillithickened moles. But it was in  Europe, more precisely in France, that generations of cooks developed sauce  making into a systematic art, and made it the heart of a national cuisine that  became an international standard.  Ancient Times  Our first real knowledge of sauce-like preparations in Europe comes from Roman
times. A Latin poem from around 25   CE   describes a peasant farmer making a spread  of pounded herbs, cheese, oil, and vinegar — an ancestor of   pesto genovese   — that  gave a pungent, salty, aromatic savor to his flatbread (see box, p. 583).  A few centuries later, the Latin recipe book attributed to Apicius makes it clear that  sauces played an essential part in the dining of the Roman elite. More than a  quarter of the nearly 500 recipes are for sauces, the term for which was   ius,   the  ancestor of our “juice.” Most contained at least a half dozen herbs and spices, as  well as vinegar and/or honey, and some form of the fermented fish sauce   garum   (p.  235), which provided saltiness, savoriness, and a distinctive aroma (much as  anchovies do today). And they were thickened in a variety of ways: with the  pounded flavorings themselves; with pounded nuts or rice; with pounded liver or  sea urchins; with pounded bread, pieces of pastry, and with pure wheat starch  itself; with egg yolks, both raw and cooked. The sauce maker’s most important tool  was clearly the mortar, but the sea urchins, eggs, and starch are early versions of  more refined thickening methods.  Sauce Recipes from Ancient Rome  …the bulb [of garlic] with the leaves he kept and dipped in water, then  dropped into the round hollow stone. On it he sprinkled some grains of  salt, and as the salt dissolved added hard cheese, then heaped on the  herbs he had gathered [parsley, rue, coriander], and with his left hand  wedged the mortar into his shaggy groin; his right hand first mashed  the pungent garlic with the pestle, then pounded everything so as to  mix the juices evenly. Round and round went his hand; gradually the  original ingredients lost their own properties and one color emerged  from several, not wholly green, since the milky fragments held out, nor  shining milky white, being variegated by all the herbs…. he poured in  some drops of olive oil and on top added a tiny drop of pungent  vinegar, and once again mixed and thoroughly remixed the mass.  Finally with two fingers he wiped round the whole mortar and brought  together the parts into a single ball so as to produce a   moretum,  perfect in appearance as in name.
—   Moretum,   transl. E.J. Kenney  White Sauce for Boiled Foods  Pepper,   liquamen   [fish sauce], wine, rue, onion, pine nuts, spiced wine,  a few pieces of bread cut up to thicken, oil.  For Stuffed Squid  Pepper, lovage, coriander, celery-seed, egg yolk, honey, vinegar,  liquamen,   wine, and oil. You will thicken it [by heating].  Pastry-Milk Chicken  Cook the chicken in   liquamen,   oil, and wine, to which you add a bundle  of coriander and onion. Then when it is done, lift it from its sauce and  put into a new pan some milk, a little salt and honey, and very little  water. Set it by a slow fire to warm, crumble some pastry, and add it  gradually, stirring carefully so that it doesn’t burn. Add the chicken,  whole or cut up, turn out on a dish, and pour over the following sauce:  pepper, lovage, oregano, honey, a little grape syrup, and cooking liquid.  Mix. Bring it to the boil in a pan. When it boils, thicken with starch, and  serve.  — Apicius  Harmonizing Flavors in Ancient China  The addition, intensification, and blending of flavors that characterize good  sauce making are central to the art of cooking, and have been considered  such for at least 2,000 years. Here is an ancient Chinese description of the  process that centers on the making of a stew or soup, a preparation in which  the solid food both provides part of the sauce and cooks in the sauce.  In the business of harmonious blending, one must make use of the  sweet, sour, bitter, pungent and salty. Whether things are to be added  earlier or later and in what amounts — their balancing is very subtle  and each thing has its own characteristic. The transformation which
occurs in the cauldron is quintessential and wondrous, subtle and  delicate. The mouth cannot express it in words; the mind cannot fix  upon an analogy. It is like the subtlety of archery and horsemanship,  the transformation of Yin and Yang, or the revolution of the four  seasons. Thus [the food] is long-lasting yet does not spoil; thoroughly  cooked yet not mushy; sweet yet not cloying; sour yet not corrosive;  salty yet not deadening; pungent yet not acrid; mild yet not insipid;  oily-smooth yet not greasy.  — attributed to the chef I Yin in the   Lü Shih Chhun Chhiu   ( Master Lü’s Spring  and Autumn Annals ), 239   BCE , transl. Donald Harper and H. T. Huang  The Middle Ages: Refinement and Concentration  We don’t know much about cooking in Europe between the time of Apicius and  the 14th century, the period from which a number of manuscript recipe collections  survive. In some respects, sauce making hadn’t changed much. Medieval sauces  often contained many spices, the mortar and pestle still pounded ingredients —  now including meats and vegetables — and most of the Roman thickeners were  still used. Bread was most common, toasted to provide additional color and flavor,  while pure starch was no longer used, and cream and butter still weren’t.  New Flavors, New Clarity, and Jellies   But there were some important differences,  and genuine progress. Fish sauce had disappeared, its place taken by vinegar and  unripe grape juice, or   verjus.   Thanks in part to the Crusades, which brought  Europeans to the Middle East and into contact with Arab trade and traditions,  many local Mediterranean flavorings had been displaced by exotic imports from  Asia, especially cinnamon, ginger, and grains of paradise; and the nut of choice for  thickening was now the almond. The mortar was joined by a second indispensable  utensil: the cloth sieve or strainer (French   étamine   or   tamis ) through which sauces  were passed to remove coarse particles of spice and thickener and produce a finer  consistency. Cooks had discovered the principle of thickening meat broths by  concentration — by boiling off unwanted water — and so developed both the  consommé and the solid jelly, part of whose value was the way it could coat  cooked meat or fish and protect it from the air and spoilage. The transparency of
clear jellies in turn led by the 15th century to an improved strainer for removing  the tiniest particles from them: a protein “fabric” of whipped egg whites that  clarified the liquid from within.  Refinements in Medieval Sauce Making  These recipes from more than 500 years ago show the great care with which  medieval cooks made sauces and jellies. The broth recipe is remarkable for its  exact descriptions of consistency and stirring time off the heat to prevent  curdling.  Fish or Meat Jelly  Cook [the fish or meat] in wine, verjuice, and vinegar…then grind  ginger, cinnamon, cloves, grains of paradise, long pepper, and infuse  this in your bouillon, strain it, and put it to boil with your meat; then  take bay leaves, spikenard, galingale, and mace, and tie them in your  bolting [flour-sieving] cloth, without washing it, along with the residue  of the other spices, and put this to boil with your meat; keep the pot  covered while it is on the fire, and when it is off the fire keep skimming it  until the preparation is served up; and when it is cooked, strain your  bouillon into a clean wooden vessel and let it sit. Set your meat on a  clean cloth; if it is fish, skin and clean it and throw your skins into your  bouillon until it has been strained for the last time. Make certain that  your bouillon is clear and clean and do not wait for it to cool before  straining it. Set out your meat in bowls, and afterwards put your  bouillon back on the fire in a bright clean vessel and boil it constantly  skimming, and pour it boiling over your meat; and on your plates or  bowls in which you have put your meat and broth sprinkle ground  cassia buds and mace, and put your plates in a cool place to set.  Anyone making jelly cannot let himself fall asleep….  — Taillevent,   Le Viandier,   ca. 1375, transl. Terence Scully  A Fine Thick Broth  For ten servings, get three egg yolks per serving, good verjuice, good
meat broth, a little saffron and fine spices; mix everything together,  strain it and put it into a pot on the coals, stirring constantly until it  coats the spoon; and so take it off the fire, stirring constantly for the  length of two   Our Father   s; then dish it out, putting mild spices on  top….  —   The Neapolitan Recipe Collection,   ca. 1475, transl. Terence Scully  Sauce Terminology   Another important development during the Middle Ages was  the elaboration of a new vocabulary for sauces and other flavorful fluids, and a  more   systematic   approach   to   them. The   Roman   term   ius   was   replaced   by  derivatives of the Latin   salsus,   meaning “salted”:   sauce   in France,   salsa   in Italy and  Spain. In French,   jus   came to mean meat juices;   bouillon   was a stock produced by  simmering meat in water;   coulis   was a thickened meat preparation that gave flavor  and body to sauces, to   potages   — substantial soups — and other prepared dishes.  The French   soupe   was the equivalent of the English   sop,   a flavorful liquid imbuing a  piece or pieces of bread. A number of manuscripts divide their recipes into  categories: there are uncooked sauces, cooked sauces, sauces in which to cook  meat, and others with which to serve meats, thin and thick potages, and so on.  And the English word   gravy   appears, derived apparently but mysteriously from the  French   grané.   The latter, whose name derives from the Latin   granatus,   “made with  grains, grainy,” was a kind of stew made with meat and meat juices, and not a  separate mixture of spices and liquid.  French Sauces from the 17th Century  In the recipe books of La Varenne and Pierre de Lune, we can find a  hollandaise-like “fragrant sauce,” the cream-like emulsion still called   beurre  blanc   or “white butter,” and the thin   court bouillon   (“short-cooked bouillon”)  traditionally used for poaching and serving fish. Notice the simplicity of  flavoring compared to the medieval dishes.  Asparagus in Fragrant Sauce
Choose the largest, scrape the bottoms and wash, then cook in water,  salt well, and don’t let them cook too much. When cooked, put them to  drain, make a sauce with good fresh butter, a little vinegar, salt, and  nutmeg, and an egg yolk to bind the sauce; take care that it doesn’t  curdle; and serve the asparagus garnished as you like.  — La Varenne,   Le Cuisinier françois,   1651  Trout in Court Bouillon  Cook your trout with water, vinegar, a packet [of chive, thyme, cloves,  chervil, parsley, sometimes a piece of lard, all tied with a string],  parsley, salt, bay, pepper, lemon, and serve the same way.  Perches in Beurre Blanc  Cook them with wine, verjus, water, salt, cloves, bay; remove the scales  and serve with a thickened sauce that you make with butter, vinegar,  nutmeg, slices of lemon; it should be well thickened.  — Pierre de Lune,   Le Cuisinier,   1656  Early Modern Sauces: Meat essences, Emulsions  It’s in the three centuries between 1400 and 1700 that the sauces of our own time  have their roots. Recipes call for fewer spices and a lighter hand with them; vinegar  and verjus begin to give way to lemon juice; coarse bread and almond thickeners  are replaced by flour and by butter and egg emulsions (see box, p. 585). And in  France, meat broths become the central element of fine cooking. This is the era in  which experimental science began to flourish, and some influential French cooks  conceived of themselves as the chemists — or alchemists — of meat. Around 1750,  François Marin echoed the Chinese description of flavor harmony from 2,000 years  before, but with some telling twists (see box below).  Both Marin and I Yin speak of harmony and balance. But the Chinese cauldron  brings together sweet, sour, bitter, salty, and pungent ingredients, while the  French pot contains only meat juices, and generates complexity and harmony by  concentrating them. Marin said that “Good taste has forbidden the burning juices
and caustic ragouts of the   ancienne cuisine, ” with their Asian spices and abundant  vinegar and verjus. Meat bouillon was now “the soul of cooking.” The meat’s juices  are its essence, and the cook extracts them, concentrates them, and then uses  them to imbue other foods with their flavor and nourishment. The purpose of a  sauce is not to add new flavors to a food, but to deepen its flavor and integrate it  with the underlying flavor of the other dishes.  Many of these preparations required prodigious amounts of flesh, the solid part of  which did not appear in the final dish. A small amount of consommé, for example,  was made with 2 lb/1 kg each of beef and veal, two partridges, a hen, and some  ham. This meat was first cooked with some bouillon — itself already a meat extract  — until the liquid bouillon and meat juices evaporated, and the meat began to  stick to the pan and caramelize. Then yet more bouillon was added along with  some vegetables, the mixture cooked for four hours, and strained to produce a  liquid “yellow like gold, mild, smooth, and cordial.”  François Marin on Cooking as a Chemical Art  Modern cooking is a species of chemistry. The science of the cook today  is to break down, digest, and distill meats into their quintessence, to  take their light and nourishing juices, mix and confound them together,  in such a way that none dominates and all can be tasted; finally, to give  them that unity which painters give their colors, and render them  homogeneous enough that their different flavors result only in a fine  and piquant taste; in, if I may say it, a harmony of all tastes joined  together….  —   Dons de Comus , 1750  The Flowering of French Sauces   Marin called his collection of   bouillons, potages,  jus, consommés, restaurants   (“restoring” soups),   coulis,   and   sauces   “the foundation  of cooking,” and said that by adopting a systematic approach to them, even a  bourgeois family with limited resources would be “able to imagine an infinity of  sauces and different stews.” French cookbooks soon began to include dozens of  different soups and sauces, and several of the classic sauces were soon developed
and named. Among these were alternatives to the meat-juice preparations,  including   two   egg-emulsified   sauces,   hollandaise   and   mayonnaise,   and   the  economical béchamel, the basic, neutral white sauce of milk, butter, and flour. But  the great majority of sauces were made from meat, and meat juices were the  underlying, unifying element in French cooking.  The Classic French System: Carême and Escoffier  In 1789 came the French Revolution. The great houses of France were much  reduced, and their cooks no longer had unlimited help and resources. Some lost  their positions, and survived by opening the first fine restaurants. The culinary  impact of these upheavals was assessed by the renowned chef Antonin Carême  (1784–1833). In the “Preliminary Discourse” to his   Maître d’Hôtel français,   he noted  that the “splendor of the old cuisine” was made possible by the lavish expenditures  of the master on personnel and materials. After the Revolution, cooks lucky  enough to retain a position  were thus obliged, for want of help, to simplify the work in order to be able to  serve dinner, and then to do a great deal with very little. Necessity brought  emulation; talent made up for everything, and experience, that mother of all  perfection, brought important improvements to modern cuisine, making it  at the same time both healthier and simpler.  Restaurants too brought improvements; “in order to flatter the public taste,” the  commercial chefs had to come up with novel, ever more “elegant” and “exquisite”  preparations. So social revolution became a new motivating force for culinary  progress.  Sauce Families   Carême made a number of contributions to this progress, and  perhaps the most notable involved the sauces. His idea, set forth in   The Art of  French Cooking in the 19th Century,   was to organize the infinity of possibilities that  Marin foresaw, and thereby help cooks realize them. He classified the sauces of the  time into fourfamilies, each headed by a basic or leading sauce, and each  expandable by playing variations on that basic theme. Only one of the leading  sauces, espagnole, was based on expensive, highly concentrated meat extract;  both velouté and allemande used unreduced stock, and béchamel used milk.  Many of these sauces were thickened with flour, which is much more economical
than reduced meat bouillon. This approach suited the limits and needs of  postrevolutionary cuisine. The parent sauces could be prepared in advance, with  the novel but minor modifications and seasonings to be done at the last minute on  the day of the meal. As Raymond Sokolov puts it in his guide to the classic sauces,  The Saucier’s   Apprentice,   these sauces were conceived as “convenience foods at the  highest level.”  Less than a century after Carême, the great compilation of classic French cuisine,  Auguste Escoffier’s   Guide Culinaire   (1902), lists nearly 200 different sauces, not  including dessert sauces. And Escoffier attributed the eminence of French cooking  directly to its sauces. “The sauces represent the   partie capitale   of the cuisine. It is  they which have created and maintained to this day the universal preponderance  of French cuisine.”  Of course this flavoring system was the creation of the line of professional cooks  going back to medieval times. Alongside it there developed a more modest  domestic tradition, which is accomplished in its own way. Disinclined to the labor  and expense of long-simmered stocks and sauces, middle-class home cooks  refined other methods: for example, making a broth from the trimmings of a roast,  using the broth to dissolve the flavorful crust from the roasting pan, and boiling  this relatively small amount of liquid to reduce and thicken it, or binding it with  cream or flour.  The Classic French Sauce Families  Carême’s original classification of the sauces has undergone various  modifications, as have the ingredients in many of the derived sauces. Here is  one modern version of the family tree that shows a number of the more  familiar derived sauces. Stocks and roux are brown if the meat, vegetables, or  flour are browned at relatively high heat before liquid is added; otherwise  they are yellow or white, and lighter in flavor as well.  Basic Sauce: Brown, or Espagnole, made with brown stock (beef, veal),  brown roux, tomatoes  Bordelaise   (“from Bordeaux”)   Red wine, shallots
Diable   (“devil”)   White wine, shallots, cayenne  Lyonnaise   (“from Lyon”)   White wine, onion  Madeira   Madeira wine  Périgueux  (village in Perigord region)  Madeira wine, truffles  Piquante   White wine, vinegar, gherkins, capers  Poivrade   (“peppered”) Vinegar, peppercorns  Red wine   sauces   Red wine  Robert   White wine, onion, mustard  Basic Sauce: Velouté (“velvety”), made with white stock (veal, poultry,  fish), yellow roux  Allemande   (“German”)   Egg yolks, mushrooms  White Bordelaise   White wine, shallots  Ravigote   (“invigorated”)   White wine, vinegar  Suprême   Poultry stock, cream, butter  Basic Sauce: Béchamel (a gourmand), made with milk, white roux  Crème   Cream  Mornay   (a family)   Cheese, fish or poultry stock  Soubise   (army commander)   Onion puree  Basic Sauce: Hollandaise (“from Holland”), made with butter, eggs, lemon  juice, or vinegar  Mousseline   (light cloth)   Whipped cream  Béarnaise   (“from Béarn”)   White wine, vinegar, shallots,  tarragon  Basic Sauce: Mayonnaise (uncertain etymology), made with vegetable oil,  eggs, vinegar, or lemon juice  Rémoulade   (twice ground)   Gherkins, capers, mustard, anchovy  paste
Sauces in Italy and England  Purees and Meat Juices   From the Middle Ages through the 16th century, Italian  court cooking was as innovative as French cooking, and sometimes more so. Yet it  stagnated in the 17th century, according to historian Claudio Benporat, as part of a  general political and cultural decline caused by an absence of strong Italian leaders  and the influence of other European powers on the several Italian courts. The  sauces that have come to be known as distinctively Italian are mainly domestic and  relatively unrefined in character, based not so much on essences as on whole  materials: the purees of tomato fruits and basil leaves, for example. The basic  Italian meat sauce, or sugo, is made in the manner of Marin’s 18th-century  consommé: meat is slowly cooked to liberate its juices, which are allowed to cook  down and brown on the pan bottom; then meat broth is used to redissolve the  browned residues, and allowed to concentrate and itself brown: and the process  repeated to produce a concentrated flavor. The meat is not discarded, but  becomes part of the sauce. Not only Italy but much of the Mediterranean region,  including southern France, has been less interested in extracting meat essences  than in highlighting and combining flavors.  Sauces in England: Gravies and Condiments   According to an 18th-century bon  mot attributed to Domenico Caracciolli, with implicit contrast to France: “England  has sixty religions and one sauce” — that one sauce being melted butter! And the  sharp-toothed Alberto Denti di Pirajno begins the chapter on sauces in his  Educated Gastronome   (Venice, 1950) with these pointed sentences:  Doctor Johnson defined a sauce as something which is eaten with food in  order to improve its flavor. It would be difficult to believe that a man of the  intelligence and culture of Dr. Johnson…had expressed himself in these  terms, if we did not know that Dr. Johnson was English. Even today his  compatriots, incapable of giving any flavor to their food, call on sauces to  furnish their dishes that which their dishes do not have. This explains the  sauces, the jellies and prepared extracts, the bottled sauces, the   chutneys,  the   ketchups   which populate the tables of this unfortunate people.  England’s culinary standards were not formed at the Court or in the noble houses;  they   remained   grounded   in   the   domestic   habits   and   economies   of   the  countryside.   English   cooks   ridiculed   French   cooks   for   their   essences   and
quintessences. The French gastronome Brillat-Savarin (1755–1826) tells the story of  the prince of Soubise being presented with a request from his chef for 50 hams, to  be used at one supper party. Accused of thievery, the chef responds that all this  meat is essential for the sauces to be made: “Command me, and I can put these  fifty hams which seem to bother you into a glass bottle no bigger than your  thumb!” The prince is astonished, and won over, by this assertion of the cook’s  power to concentrate flavor. By contrast, in her popular 18th-century cookbook,  the English writer Hannah Glasse gives several French sauce recipes that require  more meat than the meal they will accompany, and then remarks on “the Folly of  these fine French Cooks” in running up such huge expenses for so little. Glasse’s  principal sauce is “gravy,” made by browning some meat, carrots, onions, several  herbs and spices, shaking in some flour, adding water, and stewing. In the 19th  century, similarly homely anchovy, oyster, parsley, egg, caper, and butter sauces  were popular.  And the Worcestershire sauces and chutneys and ketchups that Denti di Pirajno  mocked? These condiments had become a part of English cooking in the 17th  century thanks to the commercial activities of the East India Company, which  brought back Asian soy and fish sauces — including Indonesian   kecap   (p. 499) —  and pickled fruits and vegetables, all preserved foods with intensified flavors. Many  of these preparations are rich in savory amino acids, and the English imitations  were often made with similarly savory mushrooms and anchovies. Our familiar  tomato ketchup is a sweetened version of salty, vinegary, spicy tomato preserves.  So an English contemporary of Carême’s, William Kitchiner, includes a recipe for  béchamel in his recipe book, but also presents “Wow Wow Sauce,” which contains  parsley, pickled cucumbers or walnuts, butter, flour, broth, vinegar, catsup, and  mustard. These strongly flavored concoctions were quick and easy to use, and were  evidently enjoyed for their strong contrast to the flavor of the foods they  accompanied, not for subtle enhancement.  Modern Sauces: Nouvelle and Post-Nouvelle  The 20th Century: Nouvelle Cuisine   Back in the 18th century, François Marin and  his colleagues described their bouillon-based cooking as   nouvelle cuisine,   or the  “new cooking.” In the hands of Carême and Escoffier, that   nouvelle cuisine   was  augmented with a few new sauces and became classic French cooking, the  standard throughout the western world for fine dining. In time, the classic system
became increasingly rigid and predictable, with most chefs essentially preparing  the same standard dishes from the same precooked sauce bases. The 20th century  brought a new   nouvelle cuisine,   along with the New Novel and the New Wave in  cinema. In the 1960s a number of well established French chefs, including Paul  Bocuse, Michel Guérard, the Troisgros family, and Alain Chapel, led the way in  rethinking the French tradition. They asserted the chef’s creative role and the  virtues of simplicity, economy, and freshness. Foods were no longer to be distilled  into their essences, but were to be presented intact, as themselves.  In 1976, the journalists Henri Gault and Christian Millau published the Ten  Commandments of   nouvelle cuisine,   of which the seventh was: “You shall eliminate  brown and white sauces.” The new cooks still thought that, in the words of Michel  Guérard, “the great sauces of France must be described as the cornerstones of  cuisine,” but they used them more selectively and with restraint. Lighter-flavored  veal, chicken, and fish stocks served as poaching and braising liquids; reductions of  these were used to give depth to last-minute pan sauces; and sauces in general  were thickened less with flour and starch, more often with cream, butter, yogurt  and fresh cheese, vegetable purees, and with bubbly foams.  Post-Nouvelle: Diverse and Innovative Sauces   At the opening of the 21st  century, the classic brown and white sauces have become scarce, so much so that  perhaps we’re ready to appreciate their virtues again. Those restaurant and home  cooks who do serve time-consuming meat stocks and reductions seldom make  them from scratch; these products are well suited to manufacture on an industrial  scale, and good versions are available in frozen form. The rich cream and butter  sauces popularized by the   nouvelle cuisine   have become less common; simpler  broths,   reduced   pan   deglazings,   and   vinaigrettes   more   so.   Thanks   to   the  international scope of modern cooking, restaurant diners encounter a wider range  of sauces than ever before. Many of them are contrasting purees made from fruits,  vegetables, nuts, and spices, or else thinner soy-and fish-based Asian dipping  sauces; these are attractive to restaurateurs because they require less time, labor,  and often less skill than the classic French sauces. Similarly, home cooks are now  likely to buy time-saving and versatile bottled sauces and dressings. And a few  inventive chefs are experimenting with unusual tools and materials — among  them liquid nitrogen, high-powered pulverizers, thickeners derived from seaweeds  and microbes — to make new forms of suspensions, emulsions, foams, and jellies.  The subtleness and delicacy described by I Yin and François Marin are not
especially prominent among contemporary sauces. On the other hand, never  before in history have we had so many distillations of desire from which to choose!  The Science of Sauces: Flavor and Consistency  Flavor in Sauces: Taste and Smell  The primary purpose of a sauce is to provide flavor in the form of a liquid with a  pleasing consistency. It’s much easier to generalize about consistency, how it is  created, and how it can go wrong, than to generalize about flavor. There are many  thousands of different flavor molecules; they can be combined in untold numbers  of ways, and different people perceive them differently. Still, it’s useful to keep a  few basic facts about flavor in mind when constructing a sauce.  The Nature of Flavor   Flavor is mainly a combination of two different sensations,  taste and smell. Taste is perceived on the tongue, and comes in five different  sensations: saltiness, sweetness, sourness, savoriness, bitterness. The molecules  that we taste — salt, sugars, sour acids, savory amino acids, bitter alkaloids — are  all easily soluble in water. (The astringent sensation caused by tea and red wine is a  form of touch, and the “hot” pungency of mustard is a form of pain. They are not  true tastes, but we also perceive them on the tongue and their causes are also  water-soluble molecules.) Smell is perceived in the upper nasal region, and comes  in thousands of different aromas that we usually describe by the foods they remind  us of, fruity or flowery or spicy or herbaceous or meaty. The molecules that we  smell are more soluble in fat than in water, and tend to escape from water into the  air, where our smell detectors can sniff them.  It can be useful to think of taste as the backbone of a flavor, and smell as its  fleshing out. Taste alone is what we experience when we take some food in the  mouth and pinch our nostrils shut; smell alone is what we experience when we  sniff some food without putting it in the mouth. Neither is fully satisfying on its  own. And recent research has shown that taste sensations affect our smell  sensations. In a sweet food, the presence of sugar enhances our perception of  aromas, and in savory foods, the presence of salt has the same effect.  The Spectrum of Sauce Flavors   When considered as carriers of flavor, sauces form  a broad spectrum. At one end are simple mixtures that provide a pleasing contrast
to the food itself, or add a flavor that it lacks. Melted butter offers a subtle richness,  vinaigrette salad dressings and mayonnaise a tart richness, salsas tartness and  pungency. At the other end of the spectrum are complex flavor mixtures that fill  the mouth and nose with sensations, and provide a rich background into which  the flavor of the food itself blends. Among these are the meat-based sauces of the  French   tradition,   whose   complexity   comes   largely   from   the   extraction   and  concentration of savory amino acids and other taste molecules, and from the  generation of meaty aromas by way of the browning reactions between amino  acids and sugars (p. 778). Chinese braising liquids based on soy sauce are similarly  complex thanks to the cooking and fermentation of the soybeans (p. 496), while  the spice blends of India and Thailand and the moles of Mexico typically combine a  half dozen or more strongly aromatic and pungent ingredients.  Improving Sauce Flavor   Perhaps the most common problem with sauce flavor is  that there doesn’t seem to be enough of it, or that “there’s something missing” in it.  Perfecting the flavor of any dish is an art that depends on the perceptiveness and  skill of the cook, but there are two basic principles that can help anyone analyze  and improve a sauce’s flavor.  •   Sauces are an accompaniment to a primary food, are eaten in small amounts  compared to the primary food, and therefore need to have a concentrated  flavor. A spoonful of sauce alone should taste too strong, so that a little sauce  on a piece of meat or pasta will taste just right. Thickening agents tend to  reduce the flavor of a sauce (p. 596), so it’s important to check and adjust the  flavor after thickening.  •   A satisfying sauce offers stimulation to most of our chemical senses. A sauce  that doesn’t seem quite right is probably deficient in one or more tastes, or  doesn’t carry enough aroma. The cook can taste the sauce actively for its  saltiness, sweetness, acidity, savoriness, and aroma, and then try to correct  the deficiencies while maintaining the overall balance of flavors.  Sauce Consistency  Though the main point of sauces is their flavor, we also enjoy them for their  consistency, their feeling in the mouth. And problems with consistency — with the  sauce’s physical structure — are far more likely than flavor problems to make a  sauce unusable. Curdled or congealed or separated sauces are not pleasant to look
at or to feel in the mouth. So it’s good to understand the physical structures of  common sauces, how they’re put together and how they’re ruined.  Food Dispersions: Mixtures That Create Texture   The base ingredient in nearly all  flavorful food liquids is water. That’s because foods themselves are mostly water.  Meat juices, vegetable and fruit purees are all obviously watery; cream and  mayonnaise and the hot egg sauces less obviously so, but they too are built on  water. In each of these preparations, water is the   continuous phase : the material  that bathes all the other components, the material in which all the other  components swim. (The only common exceptions are some vinaigrettes and  butter and nut butters, in which fat is the continuous phase.) Those other  components are the   dispersed phase.   The task of giving sauces a desirable  consistency is a matter of making the continuous, base phase of water seem less  watery, more substantial. The way this is done is to add some nonwatery substance  — a dispersed phase — to the water. This substance may be particles of plant or  animal tissue, or various molecules, or droplets of oil, or even bubbles of air. And  how do the added substances make the water seem more substantial? By  obstructing the free movement of the water molecules.  Food Words:   Liaison  To name both the act of thickening and the agents of thickening, early French  cooks used the word   liaison,   which meant a close connection or bond,  whether physical, political, or amorous. When the English got around to  borrowing the word in the 17th century, it was the culinary application that  came first; military and romantic liaisons didn’t arrive until the 19th century.  Obstructing the Movement of Water Molecules   Individual water molecules are  small — just three atoms, H 2 O. Left to themselves, they’re very mobile: so water is  runny and flows as easily as a stream. (Oil molecules, by contrast, have three chains  stuck together, each 14 to 20 atoms long, so they drag against each other and  move more slowly. This is why oil is more viscous than water.) But intersperse solid  particles or long, tangly molecules, or oil droplets, or air bubbles among the water  molecules, and the water molecules can move only a small distance before they
collide with one of these foreign, less mobile substances. They’re then able to  make only slow progress, so they flow more reluctantly.  Thickening agents in saucemaking are just such obstructing agents. Cooks have  traditionally thought of them as binding agents, and this view makes its own kind  of sense. The dispersed materials essentially divide the liquid into many small, local  masses: and by dividing, they organize and collect it and give it a kind of  coherence that it lacked beforehand. Some thickening agents also literally bind  water molecules to themselves and so take them out of circulation altogether, and  this too has the effect of reducing the fluidity of the continuous phase.  In addition to giving watery fluids a thicker consistency, the substances in the  dispersed phase can give them textures of various kinds. Solid particles may make  them grainy or smooth, depending on the particle size; oil droplets make them  seem creamy; dispersed molecules with a tendency to adhere to each other may  make   them   seem   sticky   or   slimy;   air   bubbles   make   them   seem   light   and  evanescent.  There are four common ways of thickening watery food juices. Each produces a  different kind of physical system, and lends different qualities to the finished sauce.  Cloudy Suspensions: Thickening with Particles   Most of our raw ingredients —  vegetables,   fruits,   herbs,   meats   —   are   plant   or   animal   tissues   built   from  microscopic cells that are filled with watery fluids. The cells are contained within  walls, membranes, or thin sheets of connective tissue. (Dry seeds and spices  contain no juices, but are still made up of solid cells and cell walls.) When any of  these foods is broken apart into small pieces by being ground in a mortar or  pulverized in a blender, they are turned inside out, so the fluids form a continuous  phase that contains fragments of the solid cell walls and connective tissue. These  fragments   obstruct   and   bind   the   water   molecules,   and   thus   thicken   the  consistency of the mixture. Such a mixture of a fluid and solid particles is called a  suspension : the particles are suspended in the fluid. Sauces made from pureed  foods are suspensions.  The texture of a suspension depends on the size of its particles. The smaller the  particles, the less noticeable they are to the tongue, and the smoother the texture.  Also, the smaller the particles are, the more of them there are to do the obstructing  and the more surface area they have to take up a layer of water molecules: and so  the thicker the consistency they produce. Suspensions are always opaque, because
the solid particles are large enough to block the passage of light rays and either  absorb them or bounce them back toward their source. Because the particles and  water are very different materials, suspensions tend to settle and separate into thin  fluid and concentrated particles. Cooks work to prevent separation by reducing the  volume of the continuous phase (draining off or boiling away excess water), or by  augmenting the dispersed phase (adding starch or other long molecules or fat  droplets).  Nut butters and chocolate are suspensions of solid seed particles not in water, but  in oils and fats.  Thickening a liquid with food particles. In a suspension, microscopic chunks of plant or  animal tissue are suspended in liquid, and give the impression of thickness by  interfering with the liquid’s flow.  Clear Dispersions and Gels: Thickening with Molecules   A single microscopic  fragment of a tomato cell wall or muscle fiber is built up of many thousands of  submicroscopic molecules. Not all of the large molecules in those fragments can  be teased away from each other so that they are individually dispersed in water.  But those that can be extracted in this way — starch, pectins, such proteins as  gelatin — are very useful thickening agents. Because single molecules are so much  smaller and lighter than intact starch granules and cell fragments, they don’t settle  out and separate. And they are too small and too widely separated to block the  passage of light rays: so unlike suspensions, molecular dispersions are usually  translucent and glassy-looking. In general, the longer the molecule, the better it is
at obstructing water movement, because long molecules more readily get tangled  up in each other. So a small quantity of long amylose starch molecules will do the  same thickening job as a large quantity of short amylopectin (p. 611), and long  gelatin molecules thicken more efficiently than short ones. Thickening with  molecules often requires heat, either to liberate the molecules from the larger  structures — starch molecules from their granules, gelatin molecules from meat  connective tissue — or to shake out compactly folded molecules — egg proteins  — into their long, extended, tangly form.  Solid Dispersions: Jellies   When the water phase of a food fluid has enough  thickening molecules dissolved in it, and the fluid is left undisturbed and allowed  to cool, those molecules can bond to each other and form a loose but continuous  tangle or network that permeates the fluid, with the water immobilized in pockets  between the network molecules. Such a network thickens the fluid to the point  that it becomes a very moist solid, or a   gel.   It’s possible to make a solid — if wobbly  — jelly that is 99% water and just 1% gelatin. If the gel is made from dissolved  molecules, then it will be translucent, like the dispersion from which it is formed.  Familiar examples are savory jellies made from gelatin and sweet jellies made from  fruit pectin. If the solution also contains particles — the remains of starch granules,  for example — then the jelly will be opaque.  Thickening a liquid with long food molecules. Dissolved molecules of plant starch or  animal gelatin get tangled up with each other and impede the flow of the liquid.  Emulsions: Thickening with Droplets   Thanks to their very different structures  and properties, water molecules and oil molecules don’t mix evenly with each
other(p. 797). Neither can dissolve in the other. If we use a whisk or blender to  force a small portion of oil to mix into a larger one of water, the two form a milky,  thick fluid. Both the milkiness and the thickness are caused by small droplets of oil,  which block light rays and the free movement of water molecules. The oil droplets  thus behave much as the solid particles in a suspension do. Such a mixture of two  incompatible liquids, with droplets of one liquid dispersed in a continuous phase  of the other, is called an   emulsion.   The term comes from the Latin word for “milk,”  which is just such a mixture (p. 17).  Emulsifiers   In addition to the two incompatible liquids, a successful emulsion  requires a third ingredient: an   emulsifier.   An emulsifier is a substance of some kind  that coats the oil droplets and prevents them from coalescing with each other.  Several different materials can serve this function, including proteins, cell-wall  fragments, and a group of hybrid molecules (for example, egg-yolk lecithin) that  have an oil-like end and a water-soluble end (p. 802). To make an emulsified sauce,  we add oil to a mixture of water and emulsifiers (egg yolk, ground herbs or spices),  and break the oil up into microscopic droplets, which the emulsifiers immediately  coat and stabilize. Or we can begin with a premade emulsion. Cream is an  especially robust and versatile base for emulsified sauces.  Thickening a liquid with oil droplets and air bubbles. These tiny spheres act much as  solid food particles do, interfering with the flow of the liquid surrounding them.  Foams: Thickening with Bubbles   At first it seems surprising that a fluid can be  thickened by adding air to it. Air is the opposite of substantial! Yet think of the  foams on an espresso coffee or a glass of beer: they all have enough body to hold  their   shape   when   scooped   with   a   spoon.   Similarly,   a   pancake   batter   gets
noticeably thicker if you stir the chemical leavening in last. In a fluid, air bubbles  have much the same effect as solid particles: they interrupt the mass of water  molecules   and   obstruct   the   water’s   flow   from   one   place   to   another.   The  disadvantage of foams is that they are fragile and evanescent. The force of gravity  unceasingly drains fluid from the bubble walls, and when the walls get just a few  molecules thick, they break, the bubbles pop, and the foam collapses. This  outcome can be delayed in a couple of ways. The cook can thicken the fluid with  truly substantial particles or molecules (oil droplets, egg proteins) to slow its  drainage from the bubble cell walls, or include emulsifiers (egg-yolk lecithin) that  stabilize the bubble structure itself. On the other hand, the very delicacy and  evanescence of unreinforced foams is a part of their appeal. Such foams must be  prepared at the last minute and savored as they disappear.  Real Sauces: Multiple Thickeners   The sauces that cooks actually make are seldom  simple suspensions, molecular dispersions, emulsions, or foams. They’re usually a  combination of two or more. Purees usually contain both suspended particles and  dispersed molecules, starch-thickened sauces contain both dispersed molecules  and remnants of the granules, emulsified sauces include proteins and particles  from milk or eggs or spices. Cooks often thicken and enrich sauces of all kinds at  the last minute by melting a piece of butter into it or stirring in a spoonful of  cream, thus making them in part a milkfat emulsion. Such complexity of the  dispersed phase may well make sauce texture more subtle and intriguing.  The Influence of Consistency on Flavor  Thickeners Reduce Flavor Intensity   In general, the components of a sauce that  create its consistency have little or no flavor of their own. They therefore only  dilute whatever flavors the sauce has. Thickening agents also actively reduce the  effectiveness of the flavor molecules in the sauce. They bind some of those  molecules so that our palate never senses them, and they slow their movement  from the sauce into our taste buds or nasal passages. Because aroma molecules  tend to be more fat soluble than water soluble, fat in a sauce hangs onto aroma  molecules and decreases aromatic intensity. Amylose starch molecules trap aroma  molecules (the aroma molecules in turn make the starch molecules more likely to  bond to each other into light-scattering, milky aggregates). And wheat flour binds  more sodium than pure starches, so flour-thickened preparations require more  added salt than starch-thickened sauces.
As a general rule, then, a thin sauce will have a more intense and immediate flavor  than the same sauce with thickeners added. But the thickened sauce will release its  flavor more gradually and persistently. Each effect has its uses.  Many sauces can be thickened not just by adding thickeners, but by removing  some of the continuous phase — boiling off water — so that the thickeners  already present in the sauce become more concentrated. This technique doesn’t  diminish flavor, because whatever flavor the sauce’s particles and molecules can  bind have already been bound. And in fact it can intensify flavor, because the  concentration   of   flavor   molecules   may   increase   just   as   the   thickeners’  concentration does.  The Importance of Salt   Recent research has uncovered intriguing indications that  thickeners reduce our perception of aroma in part because they reduce our  perception of saltiness. Various long-chain carbohydrates, including starch, first  reduce the apparent saltiness of the sauce, either by binding sodium ions to  themselves or by adding another sensation (viscosity) for the brain to attend to.  Then this reduced saltiness reduces the apparent aroma intensity — despite the  fact that the same number of aroma molecules are flowing out of the sauce and  across the smell receptors in our nose. The practical significance of this finding is  that thickening a sauce with flour or starch diminishes its overall flavor, and that  both taste   and   aroma can be restored to some extent by the simple addition of  more salt.  Sauces Thickened with Gelatin and Other Proteins  If we gently heat a piece of meat or fish alone in a pan, it releases flavorful juices.  Normally we make the pan hot enough to evaporate the water the moment it  comes out, so that the flavor molecules become concentrated on the meat and  pan surfaces, and react with each other to form brown pigments and a host of new  flavor molecules (p. 778). But if the juices remain juices, they constitute a very basic  sauce, a product of the meat that can be added back to moisten and flavor the  mass of coagulated muscle protein from which they’ve been squeezed. The  problem is that the meat or fish only gives up a small amount of juice compared to  the solid mass. To satisfy fully our appetite for those juices, cooks have invented  methods for making meat and fish sauces for their own sake, and in any quantity.  The main thickening agent in these sauces is gelatin, an unusual protein that
cooking releases from the meat and fish. Cooks also use other animal proteins to  thicken sauces, but their behavior is very different and more problematic, as we’ll  see (p. 603).  The Uniqueness of Gelatin  Gelatin is a protein, but it’s unlike the other proteins that the cook works with.  Nearly all food proteins respond to the heat of cooking by unfolding, bonding  permanently to each other, and coagulating into a firm, solid mass. It turns out that  gelatin molecules can’t easily form permanent bonds with each other, due to their  particular chemical makeup. So heat simply causes them to shake loose from the  weak, temporary bonds that hold them together, and disperses them in water.  Because gelatin molecules are very long and get tangled up with each other, they  give the mixture a definite body, and can even set it into a solid gel (p. 605).  However, gelatin is relatively inefficient at thickening. Its molecules are very  flexible, while those of starch and other carbohydrates are rigid and better at  interfering with the movement of water and each other. This is one reason why  gelatin-thickened sauces are usually augmented with starch. A sauce that contains  only gelatin requires a large concentration, 10% or more, to have real weight. But  at that concentration, the sauce is quick to congeal on a cooling plate, and it can  also cause the teeth to stick together (gelatin makes an excellent glue!).  Gelatin Comes from Collagen   Free gelatin molecules don’t exist in meat and fish.  They’re woven tightly together to form the fibrous connective-tissue protein called  collagen (p. 130), which gives mechanical strength to muscles, tendons, skin, and  bones. Single gelatin molecules are chains of around 1,000 amino acids. Thanks to  the repeating pattern of their amino acids, three gelatin molecules naturally fit  alongside each other and form weak, reversible bonds that arrange the three  molecules in the form of a triple helix. Many triple helixes then become cross-  linked to each other to form the strong, rope-like fibers of collagen.  Cooks generate gelatin from collagen by using heat to dismantle the collagen  fibers.   For   the   muscles   of   land   animals,   it   takes   a   temperature   of   around  140ºF/60ºC to agitate the muscle molecules enough to break the weak bonds of  the triple helix. The orderly structure of the collagen fibers then collapses and the  fibers shrink, thus squeezing juices from the muscle fibers. Some of the juices  bathe the fibers, and single gelatin molecules or small aggregates may disperse
into the juice. The higher the meat temperature goes, the more gelatin becomes  dispersed. However, many of the collagen fibers remain intact thanks to the strong  cross-linking bonds. The older the animal and the more work its muscles do, the  more strongly cross-linked its collagen fibers are.  Collagen and gelatin. Collagen molecules (left) contribute mechanical strength to  connective tissue and bone in animal muscles. They are made up of three individual  protein chains wound closely together into a helix to make a rope-like fiber. When  heated in water, the individual protein chains come apart (right) and dissolve into the  water. The unwound, separate chains are what we call gelatin.  Extracting Gelatin and Flavor from Meats  The muscles that make up meat are mainly water and the protein fibers that do the  work   of   contraction,   which   are   not   dispersable   in   water. The   soluble   and  dispersable materials in muscle include about 1% by weight of collagen, 5% other  cell proteins, 2% amino acids and other savory molecules, 1% sugars and other  carbohydrates, and 1% minerals, mainly phosphorus and potassium. Bones are  around 20% collagen, pig skin around 30%, and cartilaginous veal knuckles up to  40%. Bones and skin are thus much better sources of gelatin and thickening power  than meat. However, they carry only a small fraction of the other soluble molecules  that provide flavor. To make sauces with good meat flavor, it’s meat that must be  extracted, not bones or skin.  When meat is thoroughly cooked, it releases about 40% of its weight in juice, and  the flow of juice pretty much ends when the tissue reaches 160ºF/70ºC. Most of
the juice is water, and the rest the soluble molecules carried in the water. If meat is  cooked in water, then gelatin can be freed from the connective tissue and  extracted over a long period of time. When cooks make stocks, extraction times  range from less than an hour for fish, to a few hours for chicken or veal stocks, to a  day for beef. Optimum extraction times depend on the size of the bones and meat  pieces, and on the age of the animal; the more cross-linked collagen of a steer  takes longer to free than the collagen from a veal calf. At long extraction times, the  gelatin molecules that have already been dissolved are gradually broken down  into smaller pieces that are less efficient thickeners.  Meat Stocks and Sauces  There are several general strategies for making meat and fish sauces. The simplest  of them center on the juices produced when the meat for the final dish is cooked,  which can be flavored and/or thickened at the last minute with purees, emulsions,  or a starch-based mixture. In the more versatile system developed by French cooks,  one begins by making a water extract of meat and bones ahead of time, and then  uses that stock to cook the final dish, or concentrates it to make intensely flavored,  full-bodied sauces. These stocks and concentrates used to be the heart of  restaurant cooking. They’re less important now, but still represent the state of the  art in meat sauces.  Food Words:   Stock, Broth  The word   stock   as it’s applied in the kitchen reflects the professional cook’s  approach to sauce making. It derives from an old Germanic root meaning  “tree trunk,” and has more than 60 related meanings revolving around the  idea of basic materials, sources, and supplies. It’s thus the culinary application  of a very general term, and was first used in the 18th century. Much more  specific and ancient is   broth,   which goes back to 1000   CE   and a Germanic root  bru   meaning “to prepare by boiling” and the material so prepared, both it and  the boiling liquid.   Bouillon   and   brew   are related terms.  The Choice of Ingredients   The aim in making meat stock is to produce a full-
flavored liquid with enough gelatin that it will also become full-bodied when  reduced. Meat is an expensive ingredient, an excellent source of flavor, and a  modest source of gelatin. Bones and skins are less expensive, poor sources of  flavor, but excellent sources of gelatin. So the most flavorful and expensive stocks  are made with meat, the fullest bodied and cheapest with bones and pork skin,  and everyday stocks with some of each. Beef and chicken stocks taste distinctly of  their respective meats, while veal bones and meat are valued for their more neutral  character, as well as their higher yield of soluble gelatin. Cartilaginous veal  knuckles and feet give especially large amounts. Typically, the meat and bones are  cooked in between one and two times their weight in water (1–2 quarts or liters  per 2 lb/1 kg solids), and yield about half their weight in stock, thanks to gradual  evaporation during cooking. The smaller the pieces into which they’re cut, the  more quickly their contents can be extracted in the water.  In order to round out the flavor of a stock, cooks usually cook the meat and bones  along with aromatic vegetables — celery, carrots, onions — a packet of herbs, and  sometimes wine. Carrots and onions contribute sweetness as well as aroma, wine  tartness and savoriness. Salt is never added at this stage, because the meats and  vegetables release some, and it becomes concentrated as the stock reduces.  Cooking the Stock   A classic meat stock should be as clear as possible, so that it  can be made into soup broths and aspics that will be attractive to the eye. Many of  the details of stock making have to do with removing impurities, especially the  soluble cell proteins that coagulate into unsightly gray particles.  The bones and often meat as well (and skin, if any) are first washed thoroughly. To  make a light stock, they are then put in a pot of cold water that is brought to the  boil; they’re then removed from the pot and rinsed. This blanching step removes  surface impurities and coagulates surface proteins on the bones and meat so that  they won’t cloud the cooking liquid. To make a dark stock for brown sauces, the  bones and meat are first roasted in a hot oven to produce color and a more intense  roasted-meat   flavor   with   the   Maillard   reactions   between   proteins   and  carbohydrates. This process also coagulates the surface proteins and makes  blanching unnecessary.  The Importance of a Cold Start and Uncovered, Slow Heating   After the blanching  or browning, the meat solids are started in an uncovered pot of cold water, which  the cook brings slowly to a gentle simmer and keeps there, regularly skimming off
the fat and scum that accumulate at the surface. The cold start and slow heating  allow the soluble proteins to escape the solids and coagulate slowly, forming large  aggregates that either rise to the surface and are easily skimmed off, or settle onto  the sides and bottom. A hot start produces many separate and tiny protein  particles that remain suspended and cloud the stock; and a boil churns particles  and fat droplets into a cloudy suspension and emulsion. The pot is left uncovered  for several reasons. Because this allows water to evaporate and cool the surface, it  makes it less likely that the stock will boil. It also dehydrates the surface scum,  which becomes more insoluble and easier to skim. And it starts the process of  concentration that will give the stock a more intense flavor.  Single and Double Stocks   After the scum has mostly stopped forming, the  vegetables, herbs, and wine are added and the cooking is continued at a gentle  simmer until most of the flavor and gelatin have been extracted from the solids.  The liquid is strained through cheesecloth or a metal strainer without pressing on  the solids, which would extract cloudy particles. It’s then thoroughly chilled, and  the solidified fat removed from the surface. (If the cook doesn’t have the time to  chill the stock, he can soak away much of the fat from the surface with cloth or  paper towels or specially designed plastic blotters.) The stock is now ready to use  as an ingredient, to make braised and stewed meats and meat soups, or as a savory  cooking liquid for vegetables; or it may be reduced for use in a sauce. The cook  may also use stock to extract a new batch of meat and bones and produce the  especially flavorful, highly prized — and expensive — double stock. (Double stock  can in turn be combined with more fresh meat and bones to make a triple stock.)  Because a standard kitchen extraction of eight hours releases only about 20% of  the gelatin in beef bones, the bones may be extracted for a second time, for a total  of up to 24 hours. The resulting liquid can then be used to start the next fresh  extraction of meat and bones.  Concentrating Meat Stocks:   Glace   and   Demi-glace   Slowly simmered until it’s  reduced to a tenth its original volume, stock becomes   glace de viande,   literally  “meat ice” or “meat glass,” which cools to a stiff, clear jelly. Glace has a thick, syrupy,  sticky consistency thanks to its high gelatin content, about 25%, an intensely  savory taste thanks to the concentrated amino acids, and a rounded, mellow, but  somewhat flat aroma thanks to the long hours during which volatile molecules  have been boiled off or reacted with each other. Meat glace is used in small  quantities to lend flavor and body to sauces. Intermediate between stock and
glace is   demi-glace   or “half- glace, ” which is stock simmered down to 25–40% of its  original volume, often with some tomato puree or paste to add flavor and color,  and with some flour or starch to supplement its lower gelatin content (10–15%).  The tomato particles and flour gluten proteins cloud the stock and are removed by  skimming the stock as it reduces, and then by a final straining. The starch in demi-  glace, around 3–5% of its final weight, is largely an economy measure — it gives a  greater thickness with less stock reduction and loss of volume to evaporation —  but it also has the advantage of sparing some of the stock’s flavor from being  boiled off, and avoiding the sticky consistency of very concentrated gelatin.  Demi-glace is the base for many classic French brown sauces, which are given  particular flavors and nuances with the addition of various other ingredients  (meats, vegetables, herbs, wine) and final enriching thickeners (butter, cream).  Because they’re versatile but tedious to prepare, demi-glace and glace are  manufactured and widely available in frozen form.  Concentrating Stock and Flavor to Finish a Dish  An alternative to cooking stock down in bulk is to reduce it in small quantities  to augment the pan juices of a roast or sauté. Once the meat is cooked and its  juices concentrated and browned on the pan bottom, the cook can  repeatedly add a small quantity of stock to the pan and cook it down until its  solids begin to brown, then dissolve the successive brownings in a final dose  of stock to make the liquid sauce. The high pan temperature helps break  down the gelatin molecules into shorter lengths, so the resulting sauce is less  sticky and congeals more slowly than it would if the gelatin were intact.  Consommé and Clarification with Egg Whites   One of the most remarkable  soups is consommé, an intensely flavored, amber-colored, clear liquid with a  distinct but delicate body. (The name comes from the French for “to consume,”   “to  use up,” and referred to the medieval practice of cooking the meat broth down  until it reached the right consistency.) It is made by preparing a basic stock mainly  from   meat,   not   flavor-poor   bones   or   skin,   and   then   clarifying   it   while  simultaneously extracting a second batch of meat and vegetables. It’s a kind of
double stock made expressly for soup; as much as a pound/0.5 kg of meat may go  into producing one serving.  The clarification of consommé is accomplished by stirring finely chopped meat  and vegetables into the cold stock along with several lightly whisked egg whites.  The mixture is then brought slowly to the simmer, and kept there for around an  hour. As the stock heats up, the abundant egg white proteins begin to coagulate  into a fine cheesecloth-like network, and essentially strain the liquid from within.  Soluble proteins from the fresh batch of meat help produce large protein particles  that are easily trapped by the egg-white network. Gradually the protein mesh rises  to the top of the pot to form a “raft,” which continues to collect particles brought to  the surface by convection in the liquid. When the cooking is done, the raft is  skimmed off and any remaining particles are removed by a final straining. The  resulting liquid is very clear. Clarification with egg whites does remove both flavor  molecules and some gelatin from the stock, which is why the cook supplies fresh  meat and vegetables during the clarification.  Chinese Meat Stock: Clarifying Without Eggs  The proteins in egg whites are especially effective at removing tiny protein  and other particles from meat stocks, but meat proteins themselves can also  do the job. Chinese cooks make clear meat broths by cooking the meat and  bones of chicken and pork in water, and then clarifying the liquid twice with  batches of finely chopped chicken meat, which are gently simmered for 10  minutes and then carefully strained off.  Commercial Meat Extracts and Sauce Bases  These days many restaurants and home cooks rely on commercial meat extracts  and bases for making their sauces and soups. The pioneer of mass-produced meat  extracts was Justus von Liebig, inventor of the mistaken theory that searing meat  seals in the juices (p. 161), who was motivated by the equally mistaken belief that  the soluble substances in meat contain most of its nutritional value. However, they  do contain much of its savory flavor. Today, meat extracts are made by simmering
meat scraps and/or bones in water, then clarifying the stock and evaporating off  more than 90% of the water. The initial stock is more than 90% water and 3–4%  dissolved meat components; the finished extract is a viscous material that is about  20% water, 50% amino acids, peptides, gelatin, and related molecules, 20%  minerals, mainly phosphorus and potassium, and 5% salt. (There are also less  concentrated fluid extracts, and solid bouillon cubes that have various natural and  artificial flavors added.) Because gelatin would make such concentrated material  too thick to work with, manufacturers intentionally break it down into smaller  molecules by extending the initial cooking by several hours, and by pressure-  cooking the clarified stock (at around 275ºF/135ºC for 6–8 minutes; this step also  coagulates the remaining soluble proteins). In order to limit browning reactions  and keep the extract light in both color and roasted flavor, much of the water  evaporation is done at temperatures below 170ºF/75ºC.  Manufacturers now also produce more conventional sauce bases with their gelatin  intact. These are often sold in the form of demi-glace or glace de viande.  Cooks can improve the flavor of commercial meat extracts and canned broths by  cooking them briefly with herbs and/or diced aromatic vegetables. This fills out the  extract’s aroma, which is generically meaty to begin with and depleted during the  concentration process.  Wine in Sauce Making  Wines enter into the making of a variety of sauces, and sometimes are the  main ingredient, as in the Burgundian   sauce meurette   (red wine reduced by  half with meat and vegetables, then thickened with flour and butter). They  contribute several flavor elements, including the tartness of their acids, the  sweetness of any residual sugar, the savoriness of succinic acid, and their  distinctive aromas. The aromas are modified by cooking, while the tartness,  sweetness, and savoriness are not, and become concentrated if the wine is  cooked long enough to reduce it. The alcohol in wine can seem harsh when  warm, so the wine is usually cooked enough to evaporate much of it. Gentle  simmering is said to produce a finer flavor than a fast boil. The tannins in red  wine can be a problem, especially when a bottle of wine is reduced down to a
few syrupy tablespoons: the tannins become concentrated and unbearably  astringent. This outcome can be avoided by cooking the wine down with  protein-rich ingredients, including finely chopped meat or a gelatinous stock  reduction. The tannins bind to the proteins in those ingredients instead of to  the proteins in our mouth (just as tea tannins bind to milk proteins), and so  lose their astringent effect.  Fish and Shellfish Stocks and Sauces  Like mammals and birds, fish have bones and skin rich in connective tissue. But  thanks to the cold environment in which fish bodies function (p. 189), their  collagen differs from mammal and bird collagens. Fish collagen is less cross-linked,  and so melts and dissolves at much lower temperatures. The collagen and gelatin  of warm-water fish like tilapia melt at around 77ºF/25ºC, that of cold-water cod  around 50ºF/10ºC. So we can extract fish gelatin at cooking temperatures far  below the boil, and in relatively short times. The collagen of squid and octopus is  more cross-linked than fish collagen, so these molluscs require more prolonged  heating at 180ºF/80ºC to give up much of their gelatin. Most cooks recommend  cooking fish stocks for less than an hour so as to avoid making the stock cloudy  and chalky with calcium salts from the dis-integrating bones. Another reason for  short and gentle extractions is that fish gelatins are relatively fragile and more  readily break down into small pieces when cooked. And because they associate  more loosely with each other, they form delicate gels that melt far below mouth  temperature, at 70ºF/20ºC and lower.  Because fish flavor deteriorates quickly, it’s important that fish stock or   fumet   be  made   with   very   fresh   ingredients.   Whole   fish,   bones,   and   skin   should   be  thoroughly cleaned and rinsed, and the blood-rich, very perishable gills discarded.  Cooks often briefly cook the ingredients in butter to develop the flavor. A gelatin-  bodied sauce can be made from the cooking liquid of poached or steamed fish,  since even brief cooking will extract flavor and gelatin into the liquid. The  traditional cooking liquid for fish is a   court bouillon   or “quick bouillon” made by  briefly cooking water, salt, wine, and aromatics together (p. 215).  The bony shells of crustaceans don’t contain collagen, so cooking them in water
won’t give body to the extract. In fact crustacean shells are normally extracted in  butter or oil, since their pigments and flavors are more soluble in fat than in  water(p. 220).  Other Protein Thickeners  Gelatin is the easiest, most forgiving protein any cook deals with. Heat it up with  water and its molecules let go of each other and become dispersed among the  water molecules; cool it and they rebond to each other; heat it again and they  disperse again. Nearly all other proteins in animals and plants behave in exactly  the opposite way: heat causes them to unfold from their normally compact shape,  become entangled, and form strong bonds with each other, so that they coagulate  permanently and irreversibly into a firm solid. Thus liquid eggs solidify, pliable  muscle tissue becomes stiff meat, and milk curdles. Of course a solid piece of  coagulated protein can’t be a sauce. But it’s possible to control protein coagulation  so that it can give body to sauces.  Protein thickening and curdling. Two possible outcomes of heating egg proteins,  which start out folded in compact shapes (left). If conditions favor their unfolding, they  form a loose network of long chains (center) and thicken the sauce. If heated  excessively, the chains aggregate and coagulate in compact clumps (right) that give  the sauce a curdled consistency and appearance.  Careful Temperature Control   Cooks first make the flavorful but thin liquid that  will be the bulk of the sauce and then add a source of finely suspended proteins.  An example is the fricassee, in which the liquid is the stock in which chicken or  another meat has been cooked, and the protein source is egg yolks. The mixture is
then heated gently. At the point that the proteins unfold and begin to tangle —  but before they form strong bonds — the sauce thickens noticeably: it clings to a  spoon rather than running off. The attentive cook immediately takes the sauce  from the heat and stirs, thus preventing the proteins from forming very many  strong bonds, until the sauce cools enough to prevent further bonding. If the  sauce gets too hot and the proteins do form strong bonds, they clot together into  dense particles, and the sauce becomes grainy and thins out again. Most animal  proteins coagulate beginning around 140ºF/60ºC, but this critical point can vary,  so there’s no substitute for careful monitoring of the sauce’s consistency. Once the  sauce has thickened, careful straining can remove the few particles that may have  formed.  In all protein-thickened sauces, the cook must take care when mixing the hot  sauce with the cool thickener. It’s always safest to stir some of the sauce into the  thickener, thus heating the thickener gently and diluting it, and then add that  mixture to the rest of the sauce. If the thickener goes directly into the sauce, then  some of the thickener will get instantly overheated and coagulate into grainy  particles. Cooks sometimes work pastes of liver or shellfish organs into butter and  then chill the mix. When a chunk of the mix is added to the sauce, the butter melts  and slowly releases the thickener into the sauce, while making it somewhat harder  for the thickener proteins to bond to each other and coagulate. The inclusion of  flour or starch can protect sauce proteins from coagulating; the long starch  molecules get in the way of the proteins and prevent them from forming many  strong bonds with each other.  If you do overcook a protein-thickened sauce and it separates into thin liquid and  grainy particles, you can salvage it by remixing the sauce in a blender, straining it  of any remaining coarse particles, and if necessary rethickening it with whatever  materials are handy (egg yolks, flour, or starch).  Protein-Thickened Sauces and Health  Sauces thickened with proteins are very nutritious, and microbes can multiply  rapidly in them. They’re best held either above 140ºF/60ºC or below 40ºF/5ºC  to prevent the growth of bacteria that can cause food poisoning. When
cooling large quantities of meat stock, the cook should divide the stock into  small portions so that their temperature will fall rapidly through the  potentially dangerous temperature range.  Like well-browned meats themselves, meat stocks and sauces whose flavor  comes from browned pan juices or from long reduction carry small quantities  of chemicals called heterocyclic amines. HCAs are known to damage DNA and  therefore may contribute to the development of cancer (p. 124). We don’t yet  know whether the levels found in meats and sauces pose a significant risk.  Vegetables in the cabbage family contain chemicals that prevent HCAs from  damaging DNA, so it may be that other foods in a well-balanced diet protect  us from the toxic effects of HCAs.  Egg Yolks   Egg yolks are the most efficient protein thickeners, in part because they  are so concentrated: egg yolks are only 50% water and 16% protein. They are also  the handiest, being a common, inexpensive ingredient, and their proteins are  already finely dispersed in a rich, creamy fluid. They’re mainly used to thicken light-  colored white sauces, blanquettes, and fricassees. Yolk-thickened sauces can be  brought to the boil as long as they’re also partly thickened by starch.  Sabayon sauces are also partly thickened by the coagulation of yolk proteins(p.  639).  Liver   Liver   is   a   flavorful   thickener,   but   has   the   disadvantage   of   requiring  disintegration before it can be used. The coagulable proteins are concentrated  inside its cells, so the cook must break the cells open by pounding the tissue, and  then strain away the particles of connective tissue that hold the cells together.  Blood   Blood is the traditional thickening agent in   coq au vin,   the French rooster in  wine sauce, and in braises of game animals (civets). It’s about 80% water and 17%  protein, and consists of two phases: the various cells, including the red cells  colored by hemoglobin, and the fluid plasma in which the cells float. The plasma  makes up about two thirds of cattle and pig blood and contains dispersed  proteins, about 7% by weight. Albumin is the protein that causes blood to thicken  when heated above 167ºF/75ºC .  Shellfish Organs   The liver and eggs of crustaceans, and the sexual tissues of sea
urchins have the same advantages and disadvantages as liver, and thicken and  coagulate at much lower temperatures. They should be added carefully to a sauce  that has first been allowed to cool well below the boil.  Cheese and Yogurt   These cultured milk products differ from the other protein  thickeners in that their casein proteins have already been coagulated by enzyme  activity and/or acidity. They’re thus unable to develop a new thickness by being  heated with a sauce. Instead, they lend their own thickness as they’re mixed into  the sauce. They’re best subjected to only moderate heat, since temperatures  approaching the boil can cause curdling. Yogurt is a more effective thickener if it  has been drained of its watery whey. The best cheeses for thickening have a  creamy consistency themselves, an indication that the protein network has been  broken down into small, easily dispersed pieces; more intact casein fibers can form  stringy   aggregates   (p.   65).   Most   cheeses   are   a   concentrated   source   of   fat,  emulsified droplets of which also contribute body.  Almond Milk   This water extract of soaked ground almonds contains a significant  amount of protein that causes the liquid to thicken when heated or acidified(p.  504).  Solid Sauces: Gelatin Jellies and Carbohydrate Jellies  When a meat or fish stock is allowed to cool to room temperature, it may set into a  fragile solid, or gel. This behavior can be undesirable, for example when it causes  some sauce to congeal on the plate. But cooks also exploit it to make delightful  jellies, a sort of solid sauce. A gel forms when the gelatin concentration is  sufficiently high, around 1% or more of the stock’s total weight. At these  concentrations, there are enough gelatin molecules in the stock that their long  chains can overlap with each other to form a continuous network throughout the  stock.  As the hot stock cools down to the melting temperature of gelatin, around  100ºF/40ºC, the extended gelatin chains begin to assume the coiled shape that  they had in the original triple helix of the collagen fibers (p. 597). And when coils  on different molecules approach each other, they nest closely alongside each  other and bond to form new double and triple helixes. These reassembled collagen  junctions give some rigidity to the network of gelatin molecules, and they and the  water molecules they surround can no longer flow freely: so the liquid turns into a
solid. A 1% gelatin gel is fragile and quivery and breaks easily when handled; the  more familiar and robust dessert jellies made with commercial gelatin are usually  3% gelatin or more. The higher the proportion of gelatin, the more firm and  rubbery the gel is.  How gelatin turns a liquid into a solid. When the gelatin solution is hot (left), the water  and protein molecules are in constant, forceful movement. As the solution cools and  the molecules move more gently, the proteins naturally begin to form little regions of  collagen-like helical association (right). These “junctions” gradually form a continuous  meshwork of gelatin molecules that traps the liquid in its interstices, preventing any  noticeable flow. The solution has become a solid gel.  Jellies are remarkable in two ways. At their best they are translucent, glistening,  beautiful on their own or as settings for the foods embedded in them. And the  temperature at which the gelatin junctions are shaken apart is right around body  temperature: so gelatin gels melt effortlessly in the mouth to a full-bodied fluid.  They bathe the mouth in sauce. No other thickener has this quality.  Jelly Consistency  The firmness or strength of a gelatin gel, and therefore its tolerance of handling  and its texture in the mouth, depends on several factors: the gelatin molecules  themselves, the presence of other ingredients, and the way in which the mixture is  cooled.  Gelatin Quality and Concentration   The most important influence on the texture  of a jelly is the concentration and quality of its gelatin. Gelatin is a highly variable  material. Even manufactured gelatin (below) is only 60–70% intact, full-length
gelatin molecules; the remainder consists of smaller pieces that are less efficient  thickeners. The gelatin in a stock is especially unpredictable, since meat and bones  vary in their collagen content, and long cooking causes progressive breakdown of  the gelatin chains. The best way to assess gel strength is to cool a spoonful of the  liquid in a bowl resting in ice water, see if the liquid sets, and how firm the gel is. A  liquid lacking in firmness can be reduced further to concentrate the gelatin, or it  can be supplemented with a small amount of pure gelatin.  Additional Ingredients   Other common ingredients have various effects on gel  strength when included in a jelly.  •   Salt lowers gel strength by interfering with gelatin bonding.  •   Sugars   (except for fructose)   increase   gel   strength   by attracting   water  molecules away from the gelatin molecules.  •   Milk increases gel strength.  •   Alcohol increases gel strength until it becomes 30 to 50% of the gel, when it  will cause the gelatin to precipitate into solid particles.  •   Acids — vinegar, fruit juices, wine — with a pH below 4 produce a weaker  jelly by increasing repulsive electrical charges on the gelatin molecules.  The gel-weakening effects of salt and acids can be compensated for by increasing  the gelatin concentration.  Both strongly acid ingredients and the tannins in tea or red wine can cloud a jelly,  the acids by precipitating proteins in a meat or fish stock into tiny particles, and  the tannins by binding to and precipitating the gelatin molecules themselves.  These ingredients are best cooked briefly with the gelatin solution so that it can be  strained or clarified before setting.  A number of fruits — papaya, pineapple, melons, and kiwi among them — contain  protein-digesting enzymes that break gelatin chains into short pieces and thus  prevent them from setting into a gel at all. They and their juices can be made into a  jelly only after a brief cooking to inactivate the enzymes.  Cooling Temperatures   The temperature at which the gel forms and ages affects  its texture. When “snap-chilled” in the refrigerator, the gelatin molecules are  immobilized in place and bond to each other quickly and randomly, so the bonds  and the structure of the network are relatively weak. When allowed to set slowly at  room temperature, the gelatin molecules have time to move around and form  more regular helix junctions, so once it forms, the network is more firm and stable.
In practice, jellies should be set in the refrigerator to minimize the growth of  bacteria. Gelatin bonds continue to form slowly in the solid jelly, so snap-chilled  jellies become as firm as slow-chilled jellies after a few days.  Jellies from Meat and Fish: Aspics  Meat and fish jellies go back to the Middle Ages (p. 584), and are still delightful  showpieces. They’re made much as consommé is, ideally from a flavorful meat  stock — often cooked with a veal foot to provide enough gelatin — or from a  double fish stock. The stocks are clarified with egg whites and chopped meat or  fish, then filled and flavored just before they set. Aspics should be firm enough to  be cut as necessary, but quivery and tender in the mouth, not rubbery. When made  to coat a terrine or whole portion of meat, or to bind chopped meat together, they  must be firmer, around 10–15% gelatin, so that they don’t run off the food or  crumble. Fish jellies and aspics are especially delicate due to the low melting  temperature of fish gelatin; they and their plates should be kept distinctly cold to  prevent premature melting. A homely version of the meat aspic is   boeuf à la mode,  a pot roast braised in stock and wine along with a veal foot, then sliced and  embedded in the strained jelly made by the cooking liquid.   Chauds-froids   are meat  or fish jellies that include cream.  Food Words:   Gel, Gelatin, Jelly  Gel   and   jelly,   words for a fragile solid that is largely water, and   gelatin,   the  name of the protein that can gel water into a solid, all come from an Indo-  European root meaning “cold” or “to freeze.”   The jelly maker freezes liquids  with molecules instead of icy temperatures.  Other Jellies and Gelées; Manufactured Gelatins  The first jellies were meat and fish dishes, but cooks soon began to use animal  gelatins to set other ingredients into pleasing solids, especially creams and fruit  juices, and prepared gelatin became a standard ingredient for the pastry cook,
who also uses it to give a melting firmness to some mousses, whipped creams, and  pastry creams. The most familiar jellies in the United States today, both made from  manufactured gelatin powders, are sweet, fruit-flavored, fluorescently colored  desserts, and “shooters” fortified with vodka and other spirits. More refined  preparations, often named by the French   gelée,   take advantage of the fact that  other ingredients can be added at the last minute when the mix is barely warm  and about to set, so fresh and delicate flavors can be preserved in the jelly: such  things as champagne or the “water” from a seeded tomato.  Gelatin Production   Most manufactured gelatin in the United States and Europe  comes from pigskin, though some is also made from cattle skins and from bones.  Industrial extraction is far more efficient and gentler on the gelatin chains than  kitchen extractions. The pigskins are soaked in dilute acid for 18–24 hours to break  the collagen’s cross-linking bonds, and then are extracted in several changes in  water, beginning at just 130ºF/55ºC, and ending around 195ºF/90ºC. The low-  temperature extracts contain the most intact gelatin molecules, produce the  strongest gels, and are the lightest in color; higher temperatures damage more  gelatin chains and cause a yellow discoloration. The extracts are then filtered,  purified, their pH adjusted to 5.5, evaporated, sterilized, and dried into sheets or  granules that are 85–90% gelatin, 8–15% water, 1–2% salts, and 1% glucose.  Gelatin quality is sometimes indicated by a “Bloom” number (named for Oscar  Bloom, inventor of the measuring device), with high numbers (250) indicating high  gelling power.  Types of Gelatin   Gelatin is sold in several different forms. Granulated gelatin and  sheet gelatin are given an initial soaking in cold water so that the solid gelatin  network can absorb moisture and dissolve readily when warm liquid is added. If  added to the warm liquid directly, the outer layers of the solid granules can  become gluey and stick neighboring granules together, though even these  clusters eventually disperse. Sheets with their small surface area introduce less air  into the liquid, which can be an advantage when the cook wants great clarity in  the jelly. There is also an “instant” gelatin that is manufactured by drying the  extract rapidly before the gelatin chains can form junctions, so it disperses directly  in warm liquid. And hydrolyzed gelatins have been intentionally broken into chains  too short to form a gel; they’re used in food manufacturing as an emulsifying  agent (p. 627).  The standard proportion advised by dessert gelatin packages is one 7-gm package
per cup/240 ml, or about a 3% solution; 2% and 1% solutions are progressively  more tender.  Gelatin Doesn’t Strengthen Nails or Hair  Though it’s widely believed that gelatin supplements strengthen both nails  and hair, there is no good evidence that this is true. Nails and hair are made of  a very different protein called keratin, and gelatin has no advantage over  other protein sources in supplying the building blocks for keratin production.  Carbohydrate Gelling agents: Agar, Carrageenan, Alginates  Gelatin isn’t the only ingredient that cooks have at their disposal for turning a  flavorful liquid into an intriguing solid. Starch gels give us various pie fillings and  the candy called Turkish Delight, and pectin gels the many fruit jellies and jams (p.  296). Along the seacoasts of the world, cooks found long ago that various  seaweeds release a viscous substance into hot water that forms a gel when the  water   cools.   These   substances   are   not   proteins   like   gelatin,   but   unusual  carbohydrates with some unusual and useful properties. Food manufacturers use  them to make gels and to stabilize emulsions (cream and ice cream, for example).  Agar   Agar, a shortened version of the Malay   agar agar,   is a mixture of several  different carbohydrates and other materials that has long been extracted from  several genera of red algae (p. 341). It’s now manufactured by boiling the  seaweeds, filtering the liquid, and freeze-drying it in the form of sticks or strands,  which are readily available in Asian groceries. The solid pieces of agar can be eaten  uncooked as a chewy ingredient in cold salads, soaked and cut into bite-sized  pieces. In China agar is made into an unflavored gel that’s sliced and served in a  complex sauce; it’s also used to gel flavorful mixtures of fruit juice and sugar, and  stews of meats, fish, or vegetables. In Japan agar is made into jellied sweets.  Agar forms gels at even lower concentrations than gelatin does, less than 1% by  weight. An agar jelly is somewhat opaque, and has a more crumbly texture than a  gelatin jelly. To make an agar jelly, the dried agar is soaked in cold water, then
heated to the boil to fully dissolve the carbohydrate chains, mixed with the other  ingredients,   and   the   mixture   strained   and   cooled   until   it   sets,   at   around  110ºF/38ºC. But where a gelatin gel sets and remelts at around the same  temperature,   an   agar   gel   only   melts   again   when   its   temperature   reaches  185ºF/85ºC. So an agar gel won’t melt in the mouth; it must be chewed into  particles. On the other hand, it will remain solid on hot days, and can even be  served hot. Modern cooks have used this property to disperse small agar-gelled  morsels of contrasting flavor into a hot dish.  Agar: From Pudding to Petri Dish  Solid gels made from agar have long been a standard tool in the study of  microbes. Scientists make them up to include various nutrients, and then  grow colonies of microbes on their surface. Agar gels have several important  advantages over the original growth medium, which was gelatin. Very few  bacteria can digest the unusual agar carbohydrates, so agar gels remain intact  and the bacterial colonies separate, while many bacteria digest proteins and  can quickly liquefy a gelatin gel into a useless soup. And agar gels remain  solid at the ideal temperatures for bacterial growth, often around 100ºF/38ºC,  a temperature at which gelatin begins to melt.  How did microbiologists come to use agar? In the late 19th century, Lina  Hesse, the American wife of a German scientist, recalled the advice of family  friends who had lived in Asia, and made agar jellies and puddings that stayed  solid in the summer heat of Dresden. Her husband relayed his wife’s  suggestion to his boss, the pioneering microbiologist Robert Koch, who then  used agar to isolate the bacterium that causes tuberculosis.  Carrageenan, Alginates, Gellan   Experimentally minded cooks are exploring a  number of other unusual carbohydrate gelling agents, some traditional and some  not.   Carrageenan,   from certain red algae(p. 341), has long been used in China to  gel stews and flavored liquids, and in Ireland to make a kind of milk pudding.  Purified fractions of crude carrageenan produce gels with a range of textures, from  brittle to elastic.   Alginates   come from a number of brown seaweeds, and form gels
only in the presence of calcium (in milk and cream, for example). Inventive cooks  have taken advantage of this to make small flavored spheres and threads: they  prepare a calcium-free alginate solution of the desired flavor and color, and then  drip or inject it into a calcium solution, where it immediately gels.   Gellan,   an  industrial discovery, is a carbohydrate secreted by a bacterium, and in the presence  of salts or acid forms very clear gels that release their flavor well.  Gelatinous Delicacies: Tendons, Fins, and Nests  The Chinese are great admirers of gelatinous textures, the semi-solid  stickiness of long-cooked gelatin-rich connective tissue, and make soups from  several ingredients that in the West are hardly considered to be edible. Beef  tendons are one example; they are essentially pure connective tissue, and  when simmered for hours develop a texture that is simultaneously gelatinous  and crunchy. Shark fins are a delicacy that are dried after being taken from  that cartilaginous fish, then rehydrated, simmered in several changes of water  to remove off-flavors, and then simmered in broth.  Most unusual of all are the nests of cave-dwelling birds in the swallow family,  swiftlets of the genus   Collocalia,   which are found throughout Southeast and  South Asia. The males build their nests up from strands of their saliva, which  stick to the cave walls and dry to form a small but strong cup. The harvested  nests are soaked in cold water to rinse out impurities and to let them absorb  water and swell. They’re then simmered in broth, and enjoyed for their  semisolid, gelatinous consistency, which is due not to gelatin itself, but to  salivary proteins called mucins, which are related to the mucins in egg white  (p. 77).  Sauces Thickened with Flour and Starch  Many sauces, from long-simmered classic French brown sauces to last-minute  gravies, owe at least part of their consistency to the substance called   starch.   Unlike  the other thickening agents, starch is a major component of our daily diet. It’s the  molecule   in   which   most   plants   store   the   energy   they   generate   from
photosynthesis, and provides about three-quarters of the calories for the earth’s  human population, mainly in the form of grains and root vegetables. It’s the least  expensive and most versatile thickener the cook has to work with, a worthy  adjunct to gelatin and fat. The cook can choose among several different kinds of  starch, each with its own qualities.  The Nature of Starch  Starch molecules are long chains of thousands of glucose sugar molecules linked  up together. There are two kinds of starch molecules: long straight chains called  amylose, and short, branched, bushy chains called amylopectin. Plants deposit  starch molecules in microscopic solid granules. The size, shape, amylose and  amylopectin contents, and cooking qualities of the starch granules vary from  species to species.  Pure Starch  Starch has been separated from the proteins and other materials in grains  since ancient times. The Romans called it   amylum,   which meant “not ground  at the mill.”   They made it by grinding wheat in a mortar and then soaking the  flour for days, during which bacteria grew and digested the grain’s cell walls  and gluten proteins while leaving the dense, solid starch grains intact. They  reground the dregs, and then pressed them through fine linen, which  retained the small grains. The starch grains were dried in the sun, and then  either cooked in milk or used to thicken sauces (p. 583).  Linear Amylose and Bushy Amylopectin   The shapes of amylose and amylopectin  molecules have a direct effect on their ability to thicken a sauce. The straight  amylose chains coil up into long helical structures when dissolved in water, but  they retain their basically linear shape. Their elongation makes it very likely that  one chain will knock into another or into a granule: each sweeps through a  relatively large volume of liquid. By contrast, the branched shape of amylopectin  makes for a compact target and therefore a molecule less likely to collide with  others; and even if it does collide, it’s less likely to get tangled up and slow the
motion of other molecules and granules in the vicinity. A small number of very  long amylose molecules, then, will do the job of more but shorter amylose  molecules, and of many more bushy amylopectins. For this reason, the cook can  obtain the same degree of thickening from a smaller amount of long-amylose  potato starch than from moderate-amylose wheat and corn starches.  Two kinds of starch. Starch molecules are chains made up of hundreds or thousands of  glucose molecules bonded together. They take two forms: straight chains of amylose  (left), and branched chains of amylopectin (right). A long amylose chain moves around  in a larger volume than the more compact amylopectin containing the same number  of glucose molecules, and is more likely to tangle with other chains. Amylose is  therefore a more effective thickener than amylopectin.  Swelling and Gelation   What makes starch so useful is its behavior in hot water.  Mix some flour or cornstarch into cold water, and nothing much happens. The  starch granules slowly absorb a limited amount of water, about 30% of their own  weight, and they simply sink to the bottom of the pot and sit there. But when the  water gets hot enough, the energy of its molecules is sufficient to disrupt the  weaker regions of the granule. The granules then absorb more water and swell up,  thereby putting greater and greater stress on the more organized, stronger  granule regions. Within a certain range of temperatures characteristic of each  starch source but usually beginning around 120–140ºF/50–60ºC, the granules  suddenly lose their organized structure, absorb a great deal of water, and become  amorphous networks of starch and water intermingled. This temperature is called  the   gelation range,   because the granules become individual gels, or water-  containing meshworks of long molecules. This range can be recognized by the fact
that   the   initially   cloudy   suspension   of   granules   suddenly   becomes   more  translucent. The individual starch molecules become less closely packed together  and don’t deflect as many light rays, and so the mixture becomes clearer.  Thickening: The Granules Leak Starch   Depending on how concentrated the  starch granules are to begin with, the starch-water mixture may noticeably thicken  at various points during their swelling and gelation. Most sauces are rather dilute  (less than 5% starch by weight) and thicken during gelation, when the mixture  begins to become translucent. They reach their greatest thickness after the gelated  granules begin to leak amylose and amylopectin molecules into the surrounding  liquid. The long amylose molecules form something like a three-dimensional  fishnet that not only entraps pockets of water, but blocks the movements of the  whale-like, water-swollen starch granules.  Thickening a sauce with starch. Uncooked starch granules offer little obstruction to the  flow of the surrounding liquid (left). As the sauce heats up and the temperature  reaches the gelation range, the granules absorb water and swell, and the sauce  consistency begins to thicken (center). As cooking continues and the temperature  approaches the boil, the granules swell even more and leak starch chains into the  liquid (right). It’s at this stage that the sauce reaches its maximum thickness.  Thinning: The Granules Break   Once it reaches its thickest consistency, the starch-  water mixture will slowly thin out again. There are three different things that the  cook may do that encourage thinning: heating for a long period of time after  thickening occurs, heating all the way to the boil, and vigorous stirring. All of these  have the same effect: they shatter the swollen and fragile granules into very small
fragments. While this does mean that even more amylose is released into the  water, it also means that there are many fewer large bodies to get caught in the  amylose tangle. In other words, the amount of netting increases, the mesh grows  finer, but at the same time the big whales become small minnows. This thinning  effect is especially striking in the case of very thick pastes, less obvious in normal  sauces. If the granules are few and far between to begin with, their disintegration is  less noticeable. This thinning is accompanied by a greater refinement of texture, as  the starch particles disappear and only indetectably small molecules remain.  Some of the thinning of long-simmered starch-based sauces is caused by the  gradual breakdown of the starch molecules themselves into smaller fragments.  Acidity accelerates this breakdown.  Starch in sauce making. A swollen granule of potato starch caught in a meshwork of  molecules freed from it and other granules (left). A starch-thickened sauce is thickest  at this stage, when both starch granules and molecules block the movement of water.  A granule of wheat starch that has lost nearly all of its starch molecules to the  surrounding liquid (right). As the granules in a starch-thickened sauce disintegrate,  they no longer get caught in the mesh of free starch, and the sauce thins out.  Cooling, Further Thickening, and Congealing   Once the starch in a sauce has  gelated, its amylose has leaked out, and the cook judges the sauce to be properly  cooked, he stops the cooking, and the temperature of the sauce begins to fall. As  the mixture cools down, the water and starch molecules move with less and less  energy, and at a certain point the force of the temporary bonds among them  begins to hold the molecules together longer than they are kept apart by random  collisions. Gradually, the longer amylose molecules form stable bonds among  themselves, the kind of bonds that held them together in the granule initially.  Water molecules settle in the pockets between starch chains. As a result, the liquid
mixture gets progressively thicker. If the amylose molecules are concentrated  enough, and the temperature falls far enough, the liquid mixture congeals into a  solid gel, just as a gelatin solution settles into a jelly. (Bushy amylopectin molecules  take much longer to bond to each other, so low-amylose starches are slow to  congeal.) This is the way in which pie fillings, puddings, and similar solid but moist  starch concoctions are   made.  Judge   Sauce Consistency at Serving Temperatures   It’s important for the cook to  anticipate this cooling and thickening. We create and evaluate most sauces on the  stove at high temperatures, around 200ºF/93ºC, but when they’re poured in a thin  layer onto food and served, they immediately begin to cool and thicken. However  thick a sauce is in the pan, it’s going to be thicker when the diner actually tastes it,  and it may even congeal on the plate. So sauces should be thinner at the stove  than they’re meant to be at the table. (Minimizing the amount of thickener will  also reduce the extent to which the sauce’s flavor is muted.) The best way to  predict the final texture of a sauce is to pour a spoonful into a cool dish and then  sample it.  Different Starches and Their Qualities  Cooks have several different forms of starch to choose among for thickening  sauces, each with its own particular qualities. They fall into two families: starches  from grains, including flour and cornstarch, and starches from tubers and roots,  including potato starch and arrowroot. Less commonly seen except on the  ingredient labels of processed foods is sago starch, from the stem pith of a Pacific  palm ( Metroxylon sagu ).  Grain Starches   Starches from grains tend to share several characteristics. Their  starch granules are medium-sized, and contain small but significant amounts of  lipids (fats, fatty acids, phospholipids) and protein. These impurities somehow give  the starch granules some structural stability, which means that it takes a higher  temperature to gelate them; and they lend a cloudiness and distinct “cereal” flavor  to starch-water mixtures. Light that passes right through a gelated mesh of pure  starch and water is scattered by tiny starch-lipid or starch-protein complexes,  producing a milky, impenetrable appearance. Grain starches contain a high  proportion of moderately long amylose molecules that readily form a network  with each other, and so make sauces that quickly thicken and congeal when
cooled.  Wheat Flour   Wheat flour is made by grinding wheat grains and sieving the bran  and germ from the starch-rich endosperm(p. 528). Wheat flour is only about 75%  starch, and includes about 10% by weight of protein, mainly the insoluble gluten  proteins. It’s therefore a less efficient thickener than pure cornstarch or potato  starch; it takes more flour to obtain the same consistency. A common rule of  thumb is to use 1.5 times as much flour as starch. Flour has a distinct wheat flavor  that cooks often transform by precooking the flour before adding it to a sauce (p.  617). The suspended particles of gluten protein make flour-based sauces especially  opaque and give their surface a matte appearance, unless the sauce is cooked for  hours and skimmed to remove the gluten.  Cornstarch   Cornstarch is practically pure starch and so a more efficient thickener  than flour. Cornstarch is manufactured by soaking the whole maize grain, milling it  coarsely to remove the germ and hull, and grinding, sieving, and centrifuging the  remainder to separate the seed proteins. The resulting starch is washed, dried, and  reground into a fine powder consisting of single granules or small aggregates.  During this wet processing, the starch granules absorb odors and develop their  own when their traces of lipids are oxidized, so cornstarch has a distinctive flavor  unlike that of wheat flour, which is milled dry.  Rice Starch   Rice starch is seldom seen in Western markets. Its granules have the  smallest average size of the starches, and produce an especially fine texture in the  early stages of thickening.  Tuber and Root Starches   Compared to the starches from dry grains, the starches  from moist underground storage organs come in the form of larger granules that  retain more water molecules, cook faster, and release starch at lower temperatures.  They contain less amylose, but their amylose chains are up to four times longer  than cereal amyloses. Root and tuber starches contain a fraction of the lipids and  proteins that are associated with cereal starches, which makes them more readily  gelated — lipids delay gelation by stabilizing granule structure — and gives them  less pronounced flavors. These starches leave their sauces with a translucent,  glossy appearance. The properties of root starches suit them for last-minute  corrections of sauce consistency: less of them is required to lend a given thickness,  they thicken quickly, and don’t need precooking to improve their flavor.  Potato Starch   Potato starch was the first commercially important refined starch
and   is   still   an   important   food   starch   in   Europe.   It   is   unusual   for   several  characteristics. Its granules are very large, up to a tenth of a millimeter across, and  its amylose molecules are very long. This combination gives potato starch an initial  thickening power far greater than that of any other starch. The long amylose  chains tangle with each other and with the giant granules to block easy movement  of the sauce fluid. This entanglement also creates long aggregates of amylose and  granules that can give the impression of stringiness. And the large swollen  granules give a noticeable initial graininess to sauces. However the granules are  fragile, and readily fragment into finer particles; so having reached its thickest and  grainiest, the consistency of a potato-starch sauce rapidly gets both finer and  thinner. Potato starch is also unusual for having a large number of attached  phosphate groups, which carry a weak electric charge and cause the starch chains  to repel each other. This repulsion helps keep the starch chains evenly dispersed in  a sauce, and contributes to the thickness and clarity of the dispersion and its low  tendency to congeal into a gel on cooling.  Tapioca   Tapioca, derived from the root of a tropical plant known as manioc or  cassava ( Manihot esculenta,   p. 305), is a root starch used mostly in puddings. It  tends to form unpleasantly stringy associations in water and so is usually made  into large pregelatinized pearls (p. 578), which are then cooked only long enough  to be softened. Because tapioca keeps well in the ground and is processed into  starch within days of harvest, it doesn’t develop the strong aromas found in wheat  and corn starches or in potato starch, which is typically extracted from long-stored,  second-quality tubers. Tapioca starch is especially prized for its neutral flavor.  Arrowroot   Arrowroot starch as it’s known in the West is refined from the roots of a  West Indian plant ( Maranta arundinacea ). Arrowroot starch has smaller granules  than potato or tapioca starches, produces a less stringy consistency, and doesn’t  thin out as much on prolonged cooking. Its gelation temperature is higher than  the other root starches, more like the range for cornstarch. A number of other  plants and their starches are also called arrowroot in Asia and Australia (species of  Tacca, Hutchenia, Canna ).  Root Starches in China   In China, starch was originally extracted from millet and  water chestnuts. Nowadays most Chinese sauces are thickened with corn, potato,  or sweet potato starch — all plants from the New World. Other Asian sources of  starch are yams, ginger, lotus, and the tuber of the kudzu vine ( Pueraria ).
Modified Starches   Food manufacturers have not been content with the starches  available in nature, mainly because the consistency they create isn’t stable  throughout   the   cycle   of   production,   distribution,   storage,   and   use   by   the  consumer. They’ve therefore engineered a variety of starches that are more stable.  Plant breeders have developed so-called “waxy” varieties of corn whose seeds  contain little or no amylose and are nearly all amylopectin, which doesn’t form  networks as readily as amylose. Waxy starches therefore make sauces and gels that  resist congealing and separation into a firm solid phase and watery residue, a  problem to which high-amylose starches are prone.  Ingredient manufacturers also use physical and chemical treatments to modify the  starch molecules from standard plant varieties. They precook and dry starches in  various ways to produce powders or granules that readily absorb cold water or  disperse in and thicken liquids without requiring cooking. And they alter them  with chemicals — cross-linking chains to each other, or oxidizing them, or  substituting fat-soluble side groups along the chain — to make them less prone to  breakdown during cooking, to make them more effective emulsion stabilizers, and  to give them other qualities that “native” starches don’t normally have. Such  starches are listed on ingredient labels as “modified starch.”  Properties of Some Common Thickening Starches Cooked in Water  Gelation  Temperature  Maximum  Thickness  Consi-  stency  Stability to   Pro-  longed   Cooking  Appea-  rance   Flavor  Wheat   126–185ºF  52–85ºC  +   Short   Good   Opaque   Strong  Corn   144–180ºF  62–80ºC  ++   Short   Moderate   Opaque   Strong  Potato   136–150ºF  58–65ºC  +++++   Stringy   Poor   Clear   Mode-  rate  Tapioca   126–150ºF  52–65ºC  +++   Stringy   Poor   Clear   Neutral  Arrowroot   140–187ºF  60–86ºC  +++   Stringy   Good   Clear   Neutral
The Influence of Other Ingredients on Starch Sauces  Flavorings: Salt, Sugar, Acid   Starch and water are the basis for a sauce’s structure,  and most other ingredients have only secondary effects on that structure. Salt,  acid, and sugar are frequently added for their contributions to flavor. Salt slightly  lowers the gelation temperature of starch, while sugars increase it. Acids in the  form of wine or vinegar encourage the fragmentation of starch chains into much  shorter   lengths,   so   that   starch   granules   gelate   and   disintegrate   at   lower  temperatures, and the final product is less viscous for a given amount of starch.  Root starches are noticeably affected by moderate acidity (a pH lower than 5),  while grain starches can withstand the acidities typical of yogurt and many fruits  (pH 4). Gentle and brief cooking will minimize acid breakdown.  Proteins and Fats   Two other materials are commonly found in sauces and have  some influence on their texture. Flour is about 10% protein by weight, and much  of this fraction is insoluble gluten. Gluten aggregations probably get caught in the  starch network and so slightly increase the viscosity of the solution, though the  pure starches are generally more powerful thickeners overall. Sauces based on  concentrated meat stocks also contain a good deal of gelatin, but gelatin and  starch seem not to affect each other’s behavior.  Finally, fats are usually present in the form of butter, oil, or the drippings from a  roast. They do not mix with water or water-soluble compounds, but they do slow  the penetration of water into starch granules. Fat does contribute the sensations of  smoothness and moistness to a sauce, and when used to precook the flour in a  roux, it coats the flour particles, prevents them from clumping together in the  water, and so safeguards against lumps.  Incorporating Starch into Sauces  In order to thicken a sauce with starch, the cook must get the starch into the sauce.  Very basic, but not so simple! If you add flour or starch directly to a hot sauce, it  lumps up and never disperses evenly: the moment they hit the hot liquid, the  clumps of starch granules develop a partly gelated, sticky surface that seals the dry  granules inside and prevents them from dispersing.  Slurries, Beurre Manié, Floured Meat   Cooks use four methods for incorporating  starch into a sauce. The first is to mix the starch with some cold water, so that the
granules are wetted and separated before they encounter gelation temperatures.  The starch-water slurry can then be added directly to the sauce. A second method  is to separate the starch or flour particles not with water, but with fat.   Beurre manié,  or “kneaded butter,” is flour worked into a paste with its weight in butter. When a  piece of the paste is added to a hot sauce in need of last-minute thickening, the  butter melts and gradually releases greased starch particles into the liquid, where  their swelling and gelation are slowed by the water-repelling surface layer.  A third method for getting starch into a sauce is to introduce it early in the  cooking, not late. Many stews and fricassees are made by dusting pieces of meat  with flour, then sautéing the pieces, and only then adding a cooking liquid that will  become the sauce. In this way the starch has already been dispersed over the large  surface area of the meat pieces, and it has been precoated with the sautéing fat,  which prevents clumping when the liquid is added.  Roux   The fourth method for getting starch into a sauce, and one that has been  developed into a minor art of its own, is to preheat the starch separately in fat to  make what the French call a   roux,   from the word for “red.” The basic principle works  with any form of starch and any fat or oil. In the traditional French system, the cook  carefully heats equal weights of flour and butter in a pan to one of three  consecutive endpoints: the mixture has had the moisture cooked out of it, but the  flour remains white; the flour develops a light yellow color; or the flour develops a  distinctly brown color.  Improvements in Flavor, Color, and Dispersability   In addition to coating the flour  particles with fat and making them easier to disperse in a hot liquid, roux making  has three other useful effects on the flour. First, it cooks out the raw cereal flavor  and develops a rounded, toasty flavor that becomes more pronounced and intense  as the color darkens. Second, the color itself — the product of the same browning  reactions between carbohydrates and proteins that produce the toasty flavor —  can lend some depth to the color of the sauce.  Finally, the heat causes some of the starch chains to split, and then to form new  bonds with each other. This generally means that long chains and branches are  broken   down   into   smaller   pieces   that   then   form   short   branches   on   other  molecules. The short, branched molecules are less efficient at thickening liquids  than the long chains, but they’re also slower to bond to each other and form a  continuous network as the liquid cools. The sauce is therefore less prone to
congeal on the plate. The darker the roux, the more starch chains are modified in  this way, and so the more roux is required to create a given thickness. It takes more  of a dark brown roux than a light one to thicken a given amount of liquid. (The  industrial version of roux making to make a starch more dispersable and stable to  cooling is called   dextrinization,   and involves heating dry starch together with some  dilute acid or alkali to 375ºF/190ºC.)  Outside of France, roux are especially prominent in the cooking of New Orleans,  where flour is cooked to a number of different stages from pale to chocolate-  brown, and where cooks may use several roux in a single gumbo or stew to lend  their distinct layers of flavor.  The First Printed Recipe for   Roux  It was long thought that the first recipes for roux appeared in late 17th-  century French cookbooks, but here is one of two German recipes from 150  years before La Varenne. They suggest that this version of the starch thickener  was developed in late medieval times.  How to Cook a Wild Boar’s Head, Also How to Prepare a Sauce for It  A wild boar’s head should be boiled well in water and, when it is done,  laid on a grate and basted with wine, then it will be thought to have  been cooked in wine. Afterwards make a black or yellow sauce with it.  First, when you would make a black sauce, you should heat up a little  fat and brown a small spoonful of wheat flour in the fat and after that  put good wine into it and good cherry syrup, so that it becomes black,  and sugar, ginger, pepper, cloves and cinnamon, grapes, raisins and  finely chopped almonds. And taste it, however it seems good to you,  make it so.  —   Das Kochbuch der Sabina Welserin,   1533, transl. Valoise Armstrong  Starch in Classic French Sauces  In the code formalized by Auguste Escoffier in 1902, there are three leading
mother sauces that are thickened in part with flour: the stock-based brown and  white sauces, or espagnole and velouté; and the milk-based béchamel. Each of  these relies on a distinctive combination of roux and liquid. Brown sauce consists  of a stock made from browned vegetables, meat, and bones, then reduced after  thickening with a roux that is cooked until the flour browns as well. White sauce  uses a stock made from   un   browned meat, vegetables, and bones, and is bound  with a pale yellow roux. Béchamel combines milk with a roux that is not allowed to  change color at all. From these three parent sauces, the cook can produce scores of  offspring simply by finishing the sauce with different seasonings and enrichments.  Once the roux has been added to the stock, the mixture is allowed to simmer for  quite a while — two hours for velouté, and up to ten in the case of brown sauce.  During this time, the flavor is concentrated as water evaporates, and the starch  granules dissolve and disperse among the gelatin molecules, with a very smooth  texture the result. Brown sauce is cooked for the longest time because it’s meant to  be quite clear to the eye, and this requires that the gluten proteins coagulate and  be carried to the surface, where they and the tomato solids can be skimmed off.  Escoffier said that a sauce should have three characteristics: a “decided” taste, a  texture that’s smooth and light without being runny, and a glossy appearance. The  taste is a matter of making fine stocks and being judicious in seasoning, while the  consistency and appearance depend on how the thickening is accomplished.  Generally, long and patient simmering is necessary, so that there will be little or no  vestige of granular structure left to the starch, and the insoluble gluten proteins  will be caught up in the surface scum and so removed from the sauce. Gelatin  contributes some body to the stock-based sauces, but the starch is what gives  them most of their viscosity. After reduction, the concentration of starch in these  sauces is around 5%, the gelatin concentration probably about half that.  Escoffier on Future Roux  Though he was a traditionalist in many ways, Escoffier openly looked forward  to the day when pure starch would replace flour as the thickener in stock-  based sauces.  Indeed, if [starch] is absolutely necessary to give the mellowness and
velvetiness to the sauce, it is much simpler to give it pure, which permits one  to bring it to the point in as little time as possible, and to avoid a too  prolonged sojourn on the fire. It is therefore infinitely probable that before  long starch, fecula, or arrowroot obtained in a state of absolute purity will  replace flour in the roux.  Today’s proponents of the classic sauces, however, generally remain loyal to  flour.  Milk-Based Sauces: Béchamel and Boiled   Sauces based on milk rather than stock  are of course much easier to make, and more forgiving; because they’re already  milky, the cook doesn’t have to worry about long simmering to clarify them. The  classic starch-thickened milk sauce is béchamel, whose only other ingredients are  seasonings and the butter in which the starch is precooked for a couple of  minutes. Once the milk has been added to the roux, the sauce is simmered for 30–  60 minutes with occasional skimming of the skin of milk and flour proteins that  forms at the surface. Starch is more effective at thickening milk than it is meat  stocks, apparently because it bonds both to the milk proteins and the fat globules  and so recruits these weighty ingredients into its flow-slowing network. Thanks to  its pleasant but neutral flavor, béchamel is a versatile sauce that can be imbued  with many flavors and served with many mainingredients. It’s also made in several  thicknesses for a variety of purposes. Thick preparations (6% flour by weight) serve  as the base for soufflés, somewhat thinner ones as a moistening and enrichment  for gratins.  In the “boiled dressing” often used in the United States to moisten coleslaw and  other robust salads, flour not only thickens the milk and/or cream, but also helps  prevent the vinegar from curdling the milk and egg-yolk proteins into coarse  particles.  Gravy  We come now to the homely Anglo-American cousin of French sauces, the starch-  thickened gravy typically made to accompany a roast. This is a last-minute sauce  that’s put together just before serving, and consists of the roast’s juices, extended
with additional liquid, and thickened with flour. The drippings from the roast, both  fat and browned solids, give the gravy its flavor and color. First the fat is poured off  and reserved, and the pan is “deglazed”: the browned solids are lifted from the  roasting pan with a small amount of water, wine, beer, or stock. The liquid dissolves  the browning-reaction products that have stuck to the pan and so takes up their  especially rich flavors. The deglazing liquid is poured off and reserved separately.  Now some of the fat is returned to the pan with an equal volume of flour, and the  flour cooked until it has lost its raw aroma. The deglazing liquid is added, around a  cup/250 ml for every 1–2 tablespoons/10–20 gm flour. The mixture is cooked until  it thickens, a matter of a few minutes.  Because they’re made at the last minute, gravies are not cooked long enough to  cause the disintegration of the starch granules, and therefore generally have a  slightly coarse texture, even when lump-free. This gives gravies a character very  different from that of the suave sauce: hearty, and when they are extremely thick,  almost bready. The cook can obtain a smoother consistency by making an initial  preparation from the flour and a fraction of the deglazing liquid, heating the  mixture until the starch granules gelate and crowd up against each other to form a  thick paste, and whisking the paste vigorously to smash the granules into each  other and break them up into finer pieces. This paste is then mixed with the rest of  the deglazing liquid and simmered until it’s evenly dispersed and the liquid  reaches the desired consistency.  Sauces Thickened with Plant Particles: Purees  Some   of   the   most   delicious   sauces   we   eat,   including   tomato   sauces   and  applesauce, are made simply by crushing fruits and vegetables. Crushing, or  pureeing, frees the juices from the cells of the fruit or vegetable, and breaks the  cell walls into fragments that become suspended in the juices and block their flow,  so giving them some thickness. Crushed nuts and spices have no juices of their  own, but they thicken a liquid to which they’re added by absorbing some of its  water and providing dry cell particles that obstruct the liquid’s flow.  Until recently, most purees of plant tissue would have been made by cooking the  tissue to soften it, and then either grinding it in a mortar or forcing it through a  fine sieve. Raw purees could only be made from fruits softened by ripening, or  from brittle nuts. Today’s cooks can use powerful machines — blenders, food
processors — to puree any fruit or vegetable or seed with ease, whether they’re  raw or cooked.  Food Words:   Puree  The word   puree,   meaning thoroughly crushed fruits, vegetables, or animal  tissue, comes ultimately from the Latin   purus,   meaning “pure.” England  borrowed a form of the French descendent, the verb   purer,   which had both a  general meaning, “to purify,” and a specific one: to drain excess water from  beans and peas left to soak. The beans and peas would go on to be cooked  into a mush, and the consistency of that mush appears to be the prototype of  other purees.  Plant Particles: Coarse and Inefficient Thickeners  Compared to the other ways of thickening, simple pureeing tends to produce a  coarse sauce that more readily separates into solid particles and thin fluid. The  solid fragments of plant cell walls are clumps of many thousands of carbohydrate  and protein molecules. If those molecules were dispersed separately and finely  throughout the fluid — as gelatin or starch molecules are in other sauces — they  would bind many more water molecules, get tangled up in each other, and be far  too small for the tongue to detect as particles. But plant-cell fragments range from  0.01 to 1 millimeter across; they give a grainy impression on the tongue and  they’re far less efficient than individual molecules at binding water or interfering  with fluid flow. And because the fragments are usually denser than the cell fluids,  they end up sinking and separating from the fluids. Heating without stirring tends  to speed this separation, because the free water is able to flow and rise from the  bottom of the pot through the thicker particle phase, and accumulate above it.  Some sauces and related preparations aren’t meant to be suave and smooth;  instead the cook leaves some pieces of tissue intact to highlight the texture of the  fruit or vegetable itself. Mexican tomato and tomatillo salsas, unstrained cranberry  sauce, and applesauce are familiar examples.
Refining the Texture of Purees   Cooks can refine the basic coarseness of purees by  modifying either the solid plant particles or the fluid that surrounds them.  Making the Plant Particles Smaller   There are several ways to make the plant  particles as fine as possible.  •   The pureeing process itself is a physical crushing or shearing that breaks the  plant tissue into pieces and liberates thickening molecules from them.  Blenders and mortars are the most effective tools for this; food processors  slice rather than crush. Producing a fine puree can take some time even in a  blender, several minutes or more.  •   Straining through a sieve or cheesecloth removes the large particles, and  forcing the puree through a fine mesh breaks large particles into smaller  ones.  •   Heating softens cell walls so that they’ll break into smaller pieces, and shakes  loose long-chain carbohydrates from the cell walls and gets them into the  watery phase, where they can act as separate starch and gelatin molecules  do.  •   Freezing a puree and then thawing it causes ice crystals to damage cell walls,  which can help liberate more pectin and hemicellulose molecules into the  liquid.  Preventing Separation   The consistency of a puree is also improved by reducing  the amount of water in the continuous phase. The simplest way to do this is to  cook the whole puree down, simmering gently, until the separate thin phase  disappears. Another way that better preserves the puree’s fresh flavor is to drain  the thin fluid off the solids and either discard it, or cook it down separately and  then add it back. Or the cook can remove some of the fruit’s or vegetable’s water  before crushing it, for example by partly drying halved tomatoes in the oven.  The binding power of the puree particles themselves can be supplemented by  adding some other thickener, dry spices or nuts for example, or flour or starch.  Fruit and Vegetable Purees  Any fruit or vegetable can be turned into a sauce by crushing it. Here are brief  observations about some of the more commonly pureed foods.
A fruit or vegetable puree. Grinding plant tissue turns it inside out, freeing the cell  fluids and breaking the cell walls and other structures into small particles. A puree is a  mixture of plant particles and molecules floating in water (left). If left to stand, most  purees will separate, with the larger particles settling to the bottom (center). This  separation can be prevented, and the puree consistency thickened, by cooking the  puree down and evaporating the excess water (right).  Raw Purees: Fruits   Raw purees are generally made from fruits, whose ripening  enzymes often break down their cell walls from within, and thus allow their intact  flesh to turn into a puree in the mouth. Raspberries, strawberries, melons,  mangoes, and bananas are examples of such naturally soft fruits. The flavor of a  raw puree is usually accentuated by the addition of sugar, lemon juice, and  aromatic herbs or spices. But that flavor is fragile and changeable. Pureeing mixes  the cell contents with each other and with oxygen in the air, so enzyme action and  oxidation begin immediately (see below for the effects in cooked purees of  tomato, a botanical fruit). The best way to minimize this change is to chill the  puree, which slows all chemical reactions.  Raw Purees: Pesto   The Italian puree of basil leaves,   pesto genovese,   also contains  olive oil and so is partly an emulsion as well. Pesto takes its name from the same  root that gives us   pestle,   and the basil leaves and garlic were traditionally ground  with a pestle and mortar. Because this takes some time and effort, modern cooks  usually prepare pesto in a blender or food processor. The choice of appliance and  how it’s used influence both consistency and flavor. The crushing and shearing  action of the pestle, the shearing action of the blender, and the slicing action of
the processor all produce different proportions of intact and broken cells. The  more thoroughly the cells are broken, the more their contents are exposed to each  other and to the air, and the more their flavor evolves. A coarse pesto will have a  flavor most like the flavor of fresh basil leaves.  Cooked Purees: Vegetables, Applesauce   Most vegetable purees are made by  first cooking the vegetable to soften its tissues, break apart the cells, and free their  thickening molecules. Some that develop an especially suave smoothness have  cell walls rich in soluble pectin, which escapes from the softened wall fragments  during pureeing. These vegetables include carrots, cauliflower, and capsicum  peppers; more than 75% of the cell-wall solids in capsicum puree is pectin. Many  root and tuber vegetables (though not carrots) contain starch granules, which  when cooked absorb much of the water in the vegetable and make it less watery.  However, such vegetables are best crushed gently, without breaking open the  cells. Thorough pureeing that liberates the gelated starch turns the vegetable into  a super-thick potato gravy, gluey and stringy.  Even though fruits are presoftened by ripening, cooks often heat them to improve  their texture, flavor, and storage life. One of the most popular cooked fruit sauces is  applesauce, which is meant to have a certain coarseness and yet not seem grainy.  The cells of different varieties have different tendencies to adhere to each other,  and that tendency can change with time in storage. Most of the soft varieties used  to make sauce produce finer-grained purees with time, while the Macintosh  produces coarser ones.  Tomato Sauce: The Importance of Enzymes and Temperatures   The most  familiar vegetable puree in the West, and perhaps in the world, is tomato sauce  and paste. The solids in tomatoes are about two-thirds flavorful sugars and organic  acids, and 20% cell-wall carbohydrates that have some thickening power (10%  cellulose,   and   5%   each   pectin   and   hemicelluloses).   In   the   United   States,  commercial tomato purees may include all the water in the original tomatoes, or  just a third. Tomato paste is tomato puree cooked down so that it contains less  than a fifth of the water of the raw vegetable. Tomato paste is thus a concentrated  source of flavor, color, and thickening power. (It’s also an effective emulsion  stabilizer; see p. 628.)  There are several variables in the preparation of purees that can affect their final  texture and flavor. Food scientists have shown this most clearly for mass-produced
tomato puree. The general lessons are also relevant to the preparation of purees  from other fruits and vegetables.  Tomato Enzymes and Consistency   The final consistency of a tomato puree  depends not just on how much water has been removed, but also on how long the  puree spends at either moderate or high temperatures. Ripe tomatoes have very  active enzymes whose job is to break down pectin and cellulose molecules in the  fruit cell walls, and so give the fruit its soft, fragile texture. When the tomatoes are  first crushed, the enzymes and their target molecules are thoroughly mixed  together, and the enzymes start breaking down the cell-wall structures. If the raw  puree is held at room temperature for a while, or heated to a temperature below  the denaturation temperature of the pectin enzymes, around 180ºF/80ºC, then the  enzymes will break down a lot of the cell-wall reinforcements, and these liberated  molecules will give a noticeably thicker consistency to the puree.  The Thickening Components of Tomatoes  Total Solids,  % by weight  Pectin and Hemicellulose Content,  % by weight  Raw tomatoes   5–10   0.5–1.0  Canned tomato  puree   8–24   0.8–2.4  Canned tomato  paste   40   4  However, when the puree is then heated to remove water and concentrate it, the  high temperatures break the already enzyme-damaged molecules into smaller  pieces that are less efficient thickeners, and the paste requires that much greater  reduction to obtain the desired thickness. If instead the raw puree is cooked  quickly close to the boil, the result is a thicker sauce that requires less subsequent  reduction. The pectin and cellulose enzymes are denatured and become inactive,  while at the same time the cell walls are disrupted by the heat. The cell-wall pectins  that escape into the fluid phase during the concentration heating are longer
molecules and more efficient thickeners.  Tomato Enzymes and Flavor   In addition to tomato enzymes that affect texture,  there are enzymes that affect flavor: and in the case of flavor, some initial enzyme  activity can be desirable. The fresh, “green”-smelling molecules (hexanal and  hexanol, p. 274) that are an important element in ripe tomato flavor are generated  by the action of enzymes on fatty acids when the fruit tissue is crushed, either in  the mouth or in the pot. Rapid cooking to the boil minimizes this fresh flavor  element, while allowing the raw puree to sit at room temperature — in a Mexican  salsa, for example — or only slowly heating it, will cause the accumulation of these  flavor molecules in the puree. A method that home cooks sometimes use is to  halve or quarter tomatoes, then bake them in a slow oven to remove water, and  finally cook them relatively quickly into a sauce. This technique minimizes the  mixing of enzymes and targets, so cells stay relatively intact, and relatively little  green aroma develops.  Then there’s the traditional Italian preparation called   estratto,   which begins with  fresh tomatoes cooked down to some extent, and then mixes them with some  olive oil and spreads the paste on boards to dry down further in the sun. This is  often described as a relatively “gentle” process compared to cooking, and it  probably does spare some damage to the pectin molecules. But in fact it subjects a  number of sensitive molecules — including the antioxidant tomato pigment  lycopene and unsaturated fatty acids in the olive oil — to powerful and damaging  ultraviolet light, which gives   estratto   a distinctively strong, cooked flavor.  Nuts and Spices as Thickeners  Among seeds and other dry plant materials, only oily nuts can be made into a  sauce base on their own. When such nuts are ground into “butters,” the oil provides  the fluid continuous phase that lubricates the particles of cell walls and proteins.  But most of the time, nuts are mixed with other ingredients, including liquids, so  they become part of a complex suspension and help thicken both with their dry  particles and with their oil, which becomes emulsified into tiny droplets. Almonds  have long served this purpose in the Middle East and Mediterranean in such  sauces as romesco (with red peppers, tomatoes, and olive oil) and picada (garlic,  parsley, oil), and the coconut in tropical Asia, where it’s pounded along with spices  and herbs to become part of the sauce for cooked meats, fish, and vegetables.
Nuts and other finely ground seeds and spices help thicken liquid sauces thanks to  their very dryness, which allows their particles to absorb water from the sauce and  thus reduce the amount of liquid that needs to be filled with particles. At the same  time, the particles themselves swell and become larger obstacles to the liquid’s  flow. Dry spices such as turmeric, cumin, and cinnamon are both flavorings and  thickeners in Indian sauces, and coriander is especially effective thanks to its  fibrous, absorbant seed coat. Dried chilli peppers, ground nuts, and spices thicken  Mexican mole sauces. Powdered versions of dried chilli pepper are prominent in  Spanish and Hungarian sauces (pimenton, paprika); mustard is also widely used.  Some spices also release efficient thickening molecules into the liquid. Fenugreek  seeds exude a gum that gives a gelatinous consistency to the Yemeni sauce hilbeh;  and the dried leaves of the sassafras tree, ground to make filé powder, release  carbohydrates that give Louisiana gumbos a slightly stringy viscosity.  Complex Mixtures: Indian Curries, Mexican Moles  The most complex and sophisticated puree sauces are made in Asia and Mexico.  The sauce or “gravy” for many Indian and Thai dishes begins with finely ground  plant tissues — onions, ginger, garlic in northern India, coconut in southern India  and in Thailand — and a number of different spices and herbs. These ingredients  are then fried in hot oil until much of the moisture has boiled off, and the plant  solids are sufficiently concentrated that the sauce clings to itself and the oil  separates. The frying also cooks the sauce, eliminating raw flavors and developing  new ones. The sauce is then slightly thinned with some water, and the main  ingredient cooked in it. Mexican mole sauces are prepared in much the same way,  except that the foundation ingredient is usually rehydrated dried chillis; pumpkin  and other seeds are another major element. Thanks to the high pectin content of  the chillis, moles have a more suave, finer consistency than the Asian purees. But  both are marvels of mouth-filling pleasure.  Sauces Thickened with Droplets of Oil or Water:  Emulsions  The sauces we’ve examined so far are liquids thickened with a fine dispersion of  solid materials: protein molecules, starch granules and molecules, particles of plant  tissue and cell-wall molecules. A very different thickening method is to fill the
water-based liquid with droplets of oil, which are much more massive and slow-  moving than individual molecules of water, impede their motion, and so create a  thick and creamy consistency in the mixture as a whole. Such a dispersion of one  liquid in another is called an   emulsion.   The word comes from the Latin for “to milk  out,” and referred originally to the milky fluids that can be pressed from nuts and  other plant tissues. Milk, cream, and egg yolks are natural emulsions, while sauce  emulsions include mayonnaise, hollandaise sauce, beurre blanc, and oil-and-  vinegar   salad   dressings.   Modern   chefs   have   applied   the   basic   idea   to   the  thickening of all kinds of liquids, and often actually describe the result on the  menu as an   emulsion,   a word that lingers on the tongue longer than   sauce   does.  Emulsified sauces offer a special challenge to the cook: unlike sauces thickened  with solids, emulsions are basically unstable. Whisk oil and a little vinegar together  in a bowl, and the vinegar forms droplets in the oil: but they soon sink and  coalesce, and in a few minutes the two liquids have separated again. Cooks not  only have to form the emulsion, they also have to prevent the emulsion from being  undone by the basic incompatibility of the two liquids.  The Nature of Emulsions  An emulsion can only be made from two liquids that don’t dissolve in each other,  and therefore retain their distinct identities even when mixed. The molecules of  water and alcohol, for example, mix freely and so can’t form an emulsion. In  addition to sauces, cosmetic creams, floor and furniture waxes, some paints,  asphalt, and crude oil are all emulsions of water and oil.  Two Liquids: Continuous and Divided   The two liquids in an emulsion can be  thought of as the container and the contained: one liquid is broken up into  separate droplets, and these droplets are contained in and surrounded by the  intact mass of the other liquid. In the usual shorthand, an “oil-in-water” emulsion is  one in which oil is dispersed in a continuous water phase; “water-in-oil” names the  reverse situation. The dispersed liquid takes the form of tiny droplets, between a  ten-thousandth and a tenth of a millimeter across. The droplets are large enough  to deflect light rays from their normal path through the surrounding liquid, and  give emulsions their characteristically milky appearance.  The more droplets that are crowded into the continuous phase, the more they get  in the water’s and each other’s way, and the more viscous the emulsion is. In light
cream, the fat droplets take up about 20% of the total volume and water 80%; in  heavy cream, the droplets are about 40% of the volume; and in stiff, semisolid  mayonnaise, oil droplets occupy nearly 80% of the volume. If the cook works more  of the dispersed liquid into the emulsion, then it gets thicker; if he adds more of  the   continuous   liquid,   then   there’s   more   space   between   droplets,   and   the  emulsion becomes thinner. Clearly it’s important to keep in mind which phase is  which.  Because nearly all emulsified sauces are oil-in-water systems, I’ll assume in most of  the following discussion that the continuous phase is water, the dispersed phase  oil.  The Relative Proportions of Fat and Water in Common Food Emulsions  Food   Parts Fat to 100 Parts Water  Fat-in-Water Emulsions  Whole milk   5  Half-and-half   15  Light cream   25  Heavy cream   70  Heavy cream reduced by a third   160  Egg yolk   65  Mayonnaise   400  Water-in-Fat Emulsions  Butter   550  Vinaigrette   300  Forming Emulsions: Overcoming the Force of Surface Tension   It takes work to  make an emulsion. We all know from experience that when we pour water and oil  into the same bowl, they form two separate layers: one doesn’t just turn into tiny  droplets and invade the other. The reason for this behavior is that when liquids
can’t mix for chemical reasons, they spontaneously arrange themselves in a way  that minimizes their contact with each other. They form a single large mass, which  exposes less surface area to the other liquid than does the same total mass broken  into pieces. This tendency of liquids to minimize their surface area is an expression  of the force called   surface tension.  Making Billions of Droplets from One Tablespoon   It’s on account of surface  tension, then, that the cook must pour energy into the liquid to be dispersed. To  make a sauce, its natural monolithic arrangement must be shattered. And seriously  shattered: when you beat a single tablespoon/15 ml of oil into a mayonnaise, you  break it up into about 30 billion separate droplets! Serious whisking by hand or in a  kitchen mixer provides enough shearing force to make droplets as small as 3  thousandths of a millimeter across. A blender can get them somewhat smaller, and  a powerful industrial homogenizer can reduce them to less than one thousandth  of a millimeter. The size of the droplets matters, because smaller droplets are less  likely to coalesce with each other and break the sauce into two separate phases  again. They also produce a thicker, finer consistency, and seem more flavorful  because they have a larger surface area from which aroma molecules can escape  and reach our nose.  Mayonnaise formation. Two stages in making mayonnaise as seen through a light  microscope. One tablespoon/15 ml of oil beaten into 1 egg yolk plus water gives a  sparse emulsion of coarse, unevenly sized oil droplets (left). Eight tablespoons/120 ml  of oil give a tightly packed, semisolid emulsion of small droplets (right). The yolk  emulsifiers   and   stabilizing   proteins   must   be   effective   enough   to   withstand  considerable physical pressure in order to prevent the oil droplets from coalescing into  a separate layer.  Two factors make it easier for the cook to generate small droplets. One is the  thickness of the continuous phase, which drags harder on the droplets and
transfers more shearing force to them from the whisk. Shake a little oil in a bottle  of water, and the oil droplets are coarse and quickly coalesce; shake a little water in  the more viscous oil, and the water gets broken into a persistent cloud of small  droplets. It’s helpful, then, to start with as viscous a part of the continuous phase as  possible, and dilute it with any other ingredients after the emulsion has formed.  The second factor that makes it easier to produce small droplets in an emulsion is  the presence of emulsifiers.  Unstable and stable emulsions. Oil and water are incompatible substances; they can’t  mix evenly with each other. When oil is whisked into water, the resulting oil droplets  tend to coalesce with each other and separate into a layer on top of the water (left).  Emulsifiers are molecules with a fat-compatible tail and water-compatible head (p.  802). They embed their long tails in the fat droplets, leaving their electrically-charged  heads projecting into the surrounding water. Coated in this way, the droplets repel  each other instead of coalescing (center). Large water-soluble molecules, including  starch and proteins, help stabilize emulsions by blocking the fat droplets from each  other (right).  Emulsifiers: Lecithin and Proteins   Emulsifiers are molecules that lower the  surface tension of one liquid dispersed in another, and therefore make it easier to  make small droplets and a fine, creamy emulsion. They do so by coating the  surface of the droplets, and shielding the droplet surface from the continuous  liquid. Emulsifiers are therefore a true liaison: they must be partly soluble in each of  the two mutually incompatible liquids. They manage this by having two different
regions on the same molecule, one soluble in water and the other in fat.  There are two general kinds of molecules that can act as emulsifiers. One kind is  typified by the egg phosopholipid lecithin. These are relatively small molecules  with a fat-like tail that buries itself in the fat phase and an electrically-charged  head that is attracted to water molecules (p. 802). The other kind of emulsifier is  the proteins, which are much larger molecules, long chains of amino acids that  have a number of different fat-compatible and water-compatible regions. The yolk  proteins in eggs and the casein proteins in milk and cream are the best protein  emulsifiers.  Stabilizers: Proteins, Starch, Plant Particles   Emulsifiers make it easier for the  cook to prepare an emulsion, but they don’t necessarily result in a stable emulsion.  Once formed, the droplets may be so crowded that they bump into each other or  are forced up against each other, and the force of surface tension may pull them  together and cause them to coalesce again. Fortunately, there are many kinds of  molecules and particles that can help stabilize an emulsion once it’s formed. They  all have in common the property of getting in the way, so that two approaching  droplets encounter the stabilizers rather than each other. Large, bulky molecules  like proteins do this well, as do starch, pectins, and gums, and particles of  pulverized plant tissue. Ground white mustard seed is especially effective thanks  both to its particles and to a gum that it releases when wetted. Tomato paste  contains a considerable amount of protein (around 3%) as well as cell particles, and  is a useful emulsifier and stabilizer.  Bouillabaisse, an Emulsified Soup  Bouillabaisse is a Provençal fish soup that takes advantage of gelatin’s  thickening and emulsifying properties. It’s made by cooking a variety of  whole fish and fish parts, some of them bony and gelatin-producing rather  than meaty, in an aromatic broth with some olive oil. The soup is finished at a  vigorous boil, which breaks the oil into tiny droplets and coats them with a  stabilizing layer of gelatin. The consistency is thus a combination of gelatin’s  viscosity and the enriching creaminess of the emulsified oil droplets.
Guidelines for Successful Emulsified Sauces  Forming Emulsions   Emulsions have always been considered fickle concoctions,  by chemists as well as cooks. One chemist wrote in 1921 that contemporary books  on pharmacy were “filled with elaborate details as to the making of emulsions,” and  recorded two such details: “If one starts stirring to the right, one must continue  stirring to the right, or no emulsion will be formed. Some books go so far as to say  that a left-handed man cannot make an emulsion, but that seems a little absurd.”  The worry is always that at some point the emulsion may break and separate into  blobs of oil and water again. This can happen, but it’s almost always because the  cook has made one of three mistakes: he has added the liquid to be dispersed too  quickly to the continuous liquid, or added too much of the dispersed liquid, or  allowed the sauce to get either too hot or too cold.  There are several basic rules that apply to the making of any emulsified sauce:  •   The first materials into the bowl are the continuous phase — usually the  water-based ingredient — and at least some emulsifying and stabilizing  ingredients. The dispersed phase is always added to the continuous phase,  not the other way around: otherwise it can’t be dispersed!  •   The dispersed phase should be added very gradually to begin with, a small  spoonful at a time, while the cook whisks or blends the mixture vigorously.  Only after an emulsion has formed and developed some viscosity should the  oil be added more rapidly.  •   The proportions of the two phases must be kept in balance. For most  emulsified sauces, the volume of the dispersed phase shouldn’t exceed three  times the volume of the continuous phase. If the droplets are crowded so  closely together that they are in continuous contact, then they’re more likely  to pool together. When the consistency of an emulsion becomes stiff, this is  a sign that the cook should add more of the continuous phase to give the  droplets more room.  Starting Slowly   There’s a simple reason for starting the emulsion slowly and  carefully, with small amounts of the dispersed phase. In the early mixing, when  little or no oil has yet been emulsified, it’s easy for large droplets to avoid the  churning action of the whisk and collect at the surface. If a large volume of oil is  added before the previous one has been fully emulsified, then the bowl may end  up with more unemulsified oil than water. The oil then becomes the continuous
phase, the normally continuous water becomes dispersed in it, and the result is an  inside-out emulsion, oily and runny. By whisking in the first portion of oil in small  doses, the cook makes sure to produce and maintain a growing population of  small droplets. Then when the rest of the oil is incorporated more rapidly into the  already well-emulsified system, the existing droplets work as a kind of mill,  automatically breaking down the incoming oil into particles of their own size. In  the last stages of sauce making the cook’s whisk need not break up the oil drops  directly, but has the easier job of mixing the new oil with the sauce, distributing it  evenly to all parts of the droplet “mill.”  Using   and   Storing   Emulsified   Sauces   Once   emulsified   sauces   have   been  successfully made, there are two basic rules for using them.  •   The sauce must not get too hot. At high temperatures, the molecules and  droplets in a sauce are moving very energetically, and the droplets may  collide hard enough to coalesce. Temperatures above 140ºF/60ºC also cause  the proteins in egg-emulsified sauces to coagulate, so they’re no longer able  to protect the droplets. And a cooked sauce that is held before serving on  gentle heat may lose enough water by evaporation that the dispersed fat  droplets become overcrowded. So cooked emulsions should be made and  held at warm, rather than hot, temperatures and should not be spooned  onto a piece of food still sizzling from the pan.  •   The sauce must not get too cold. At low temperatures, surface tension  increases, making it more likely that neighboring droplets will coalesce.  Butterfat solidifies at room temperature, and some oils do so in the  refrigerator. The resulting sharp-edged fat crystals rupture the layer of  emulsifier on the droplets, so that they coalesce and separate when stirred  or warmed. Refrigerated emulsions often need to be reemulsified before use.  (Manufactured   mayonnaise   is   made   with   oils   that   remain   liquid   at  refrigerator temperatures.)  Rescuing a Separated Sauce   When an emulsified sauce breaks and the droplets  of the dispersed phase puddle together, there are two ways to reemulsify it. One is  simply to throw the sauce in a blender and use its mechanical power to break the  dispersed phase apart again. This generally works for sauces that still have plenty  of intact emulsifier and stabilizer molecules in the sauce, but not for cooked egg  sauces that have been overheated and their proteins coagulated. The second and  more reliable technique is to start with a small amount of the continuous phase,
perhaps supplemented with an egg yolk and its wealth of emulsifiers and  stabilizers, and carefully beat the broken sauce back into it. If proteins in the initial  sauce had coagulated from overheating, the lumps should be strained out before  reemulsifying; otherwise the rescue process may leave the protein particles too  small to strain out, but large enough to leave a grainy impression in the mouth.  Cream and Butter Sauces  Cream and butter don’t need to be made into sauces — they themselves are  sauces! In fact they’re prototypes for sauces in general, with their lingering,  mouthfilling consistency and rich but delicate flavor. A ramekin of melted butter in  which to dip a morsel of lobster or an artichoke leaf, a pour of cream over fresh  berries or pastry — these are wonderful combinations. But cream and butter are  versatile ingredients, and cooks have found other ways to exploit them in  saucemaking.  Milk and Cream Emulsions   Cream owes its versatility to its origins in milk. Milk is  a complex dispersion whose continuous phase is water, and whose dispersed  phases are milkfat in the form of microscopic droplets, or globules, and protein  particles in the form of casein aggregates (p. 19). The droplets are coated with a  thin   membrane   of   emulsifiers,   both   lecithin-like   phospholipids   and   certain  proteins; and other noncasein proteins float free in the water. Both the globule  membranes and the various proteins are tolerant of heat: so plain milk and cream  can be boiled hard without the fat globules coalescing and separating, or the  proteins coagulating and curdling.  Whole milk is only about 4% fat, so its fat globules are too few and far between to  block the flow of the water phase and give much of an impression of thickness.  Cream is a portion of milk in which the fat globules have been concentrated and  crowded: light cream is around 18% fat, and heavy or whipping cream around  38%. In addition to its fat supply, cream offers proteins and emulsifying molecules  that can help stabilize other, more fragile emulsions (beurre blanc).  Heavy Cream Resists Curdling   The casein proteins in milk and cream are stable to  boiling temperatures, but they’re sensitive to acidity, and the combination of heat  and acid will cause them to curdle. Many sauces include flavorful acid ingredients:  sauté pans are often deglazed with wine, for example. This means that most milk  and cream products, including light cream and sour cream, can’t actually be
cooked to make a sauce; they must be added as a last-minute enrichment. The  exceptions are heavy cream and crème fraîche, which contain so little casein that  its curdling simply isn’t noticeable (p. 29).  Reduced Cream   When heavy cream is added to another liquid to enrich and  thicken it — to a meat sauce, or deglazing liquid, or a vegetable puree — then of  course its fat globules are diluted and its consistency thins down. In order to make  cream a more effective thickener, cooks concentrate it even further by boiling off  water from the continuous phase. When the volume of cream is reduced by a third,  the globule concentration reaches 55% and the consistency is like that of a light  starchthickened sauce; when reduced by half, the globules take up 75% of the  volume and the consistency is very thick, almost semisolid. Stirred into a thinner  liquid, these reduced creams have enough fat globules to fill it and lend a  substantial body. Cream reduction and thickening can also be done at the last  minute, for example after a sauté pan has been deglazed; the cook adds cream to  the deglazing liquid and boils the mixture until it reaches the desired consistency.  Crème Fraîche in Sauce Making   Reduced creams have several disadvantages.  They take time and attention to prepare, develop a cooked flavor, and are very rich,  sometimes overly so for the balance of a given sauce. A useful alternative to  reduced creams is crème fraîche, a version of heavy cream whose consistency has  been thickened not by boiling down, but by fermentation (p. 49). The acid  produced by lactic bacteria causes the casein proteins in the water phase to cluster  together and form a network that immobilizes the water. Some strains of bacteria  also secrete long carbohydrate molecules that further thicken the water phase and  act as stabilizers. Used in place of reduced cream, crème fraîche requires no  preparation, is less rich, and has a fresher flavor. Thanks to its low protein content,  it tolerates temperatures that would curdle sour cream.  Butter   Like its parent material, cream, butter is an emulsion: but it’s one of the few  food emulsions in which the continuous phase is fat, not water. In fact, butter is  made by “inverting” the fat-in-water cream emulsion to produce a water-in-fat  emulsion (p. 33). The continuous fat phase of butter, together with some intact fat  globules that survived churning, takes up about 80% of its volume, and the  dispersed water droplets about 15%. When it melts, the heavier water droplets sink  to the bottom and form a separate layer. The consistency of melted butter, then, is  the consistency of the butterfat itself, which thanks to its long fat molecules is  naturally more slow-flowing and viscous than water. So melted butter, whole or
clarified (“drawn”) to remove the water phase, makes a simple and delicious sauce.  Cooks also heat whole butter until the water boils off and the milk solids turn  brown, which gives the fat a nutty aroma. The French   beurre noisette   and   beurre  noir,   or “hazelnut” and “black” butters, are such browned butters, often made into a  temporary emulsion with lemon juice and vinegar respectively.  Compound and Whipped Butters   There are other ways to take advantage of  butter’s   semisolid   consistency   and   background   richness.   One   is   to   make   a  “compound butter” by incorporating pounded herbs, spices, shellfish eggs or  livers, or other ingredients; another is to whip softened butter with a flavorful  liquid into a combined emulsion and foam. Pieces or dollops of these flavored  butters can then be melted into a rich, flavorful coating atop a piece of meat or  fish, or on some vegetables or pasta, or they can be swirled into an otherwise  finished sauce.  Turning Butter Back into Cream: Enriching Sauces with Butter   Butter is  remarkable for being a convertible emulsion. This offspring of cream can be turned  back into cream! Its convertibility is what makes butter so useful as a finishing  enrichment for many sauces, including simple pan deglazings, and it’s what makes  possible the sauce called beurre blanc, literally “white butter.” There’s only one  requirement for converting butter into the equivalent of cream with 80% fat: the  process must start in a small amount of water. If you melt butter on its own, the fat  phase remains the continuous phase, and the water droplets settle out of it. But if  you melt butter in some water, then you’re starting with water as the continuous  phase. As the fat molecules are released into the water, they’re surrounded by  water — and by the substances contained in the butter’s own water droplets,  which merge right into the cooking water. The droplets contain milk proteins and  remnants of the emulsifier membranes that coated the fat globules in the original  cream. And those protein and phospholipid remnants reassemble themselves onto  the fat as it melts into the water, coating and protecting separate fat droplets and  forming   the   fat-in-water   emulsion.   However,   the   droplet   coatings   in   this  reconstituted cream are sparser and more fragile than the original fat-globule  membranes, and will begin to leak fat if heated close to 140ºF/60ºC.  Any water-based sauce can thus be thickened and enriched simply by swirling a  pat of butter into it at the end. This is especially handy in the last-minute  thickening of pan juices, which don’t have the benefit of containing much gelatin  or any starch. Incorporating one volume of butter into three volumes of deglazing
liquid — off the heat, to avoid damaging the fragile droplet coatings — will  produce a consistency (and fat content) approximating that of light cream.  In purees and starch-thickened sauces, a small amount of butter (or cream)  lubricates the solid thickeners and lends a smoother consistency. Because these  sauces are rich in emulsion-stabilizing molecules and particles, they can be heated  to the boil without causing the reconstituted fat droplets to separate.  Beurre Blanc   The French sauce   beurre blanc   probably evolved from the practice of  enriching cooking liquids with butter. It’s made by preparing a flavorful reduction  of vinegar and/or wine, then whisking pieces of butter into the reduction. Each  piece of butter carries all the ingredients necessary for a new portion of sauce, so  the cook can whisk in one piece of butter, or 100. The proportions are entirely up  to the cook’s taste and needs. The consistency of beurre blanc is like that of thick  cream, and can be made somewhat thicker by adding water-free clarified butter  once the initial emulsion has been formed. The phospholipids and proteins carried  in the butter’s water are capable of emulsifying two to three times the butterfat in  which they’re embedded.  Beurre blanc will begin to separate and leak butterfat if its temperature rises above  about 135ºF/58ºC. However, the phospholipid emulsifiers can tolerate heat and re-  form a protective layer. An overheated sauce can usually be restored with a small  amount of cool water and brisk whisking. The addition of a spoonful of cream  supplies more emulsifying materials and can make a beurre blanc more stable.  Most damaging to beurre blanc is letting it cool below body temperature. The  butterfat solidifies and forms crystals around 85ºF/30ºC, and the crystals poke  through the thin membrane of emulsifiers and fuse with each other, forming a  continuous network of fat that separates when the sauce is reheated. Ideally,  beurre blanc should be kept at around 125ºF/52ºC. Because water will evaporate at  this temperature and may overconcentrate the fat phase, it’s a good idea to add a  little water periodically if the sauce has to be held for any time.  Beurre Monté   A preparation closely related to beurre blanc is   beurre monté,  “worked up” or “prepared” butter, which is simply an unflavored beurre blanc made  with an initial dose of water rather than vinegar or wine. Beurre monté is used  among other things as a poaching medim. Thanks to the relatively low heat  conductivity and heat capacity of fat compared to water, it cooks delicate fish and  meats more gradually than does a broth at the same temperature.
Eggs as Emulsifiers  As we’ve already seen, cooks can use egg yolks to thicken all kinds of hot sauces.  The yolk proteins unfold and bond to each other when heated, and so form a  liquid-immobilizing network (p. 604). Egg yolks are also very effective emulsifiers,  and for asimple reason: they themselves are a concentrated and complex emulsion  of fat in water, and are therefore filled with emulsifying molecules and molecule  aggregates.  Emulsifying Particles and Proteins   Of the various yolk components, two in  particular   provide   most   of   the   emulsifying   power.   One   is   the   low-density  lipoproteins or LDLs (the same LDLs that circulate in our blood and whose levels  are   measured   in   blood   tests   because   they   carry   potentially   artery-blocking  cholesterol). LDLs are particles made up of emulsifying proteins, phospholipids,  and cholesterol, all surrounding a core of fat molecules. The intact LDL particles  appear to be more effective emulsifiers than any of their components. The other  major emulsifying particles are the larger yolk granules, which contain both LDLs  and   HDLs   (the “good-cholesterol” high-density   lipoproteins   are   even   more  effective emulsifiers than LDL) as well as dispersed emulsifying protein, phosvitin.  Yolk granules are so large that they can’t cover a droplet surface very well, but  when they’re exposed to moderate concentrations of salt they fall apart into their  separate LDLs, HDLs, and proteins, and these are very effective indeed.  Using Eggs to Emulsify Sauces   As emulsifiers, egg yolks are most effective when  they’re raw, and when they’re warm. Fresh out of the refrigerator, the various yolk  particles move only sluggishly and don’t coat the fat droplets as quickly and  completely. When yolks are cooked, the proteins unfold and coagulate, thus  ending   their   usefulness   as   flexible   surface   coatings.   Hard-cooked   yolks   are  sometimes   used   instead   of   raw   yolks   to   make   emulsified   sauces;   their  disadvantage   is   that   the   proteins   have   been   coagulated   in   place   and  phospholipids probably trapped in the coagulated particles, so they have far less  emulsifying power, and the yolk texture can give a subtle graininess.  And egg whites? They’re a less concentrated source of protein, and designed for a  fat-free, watery environment, and therefore of little help in coating fat droplets.  However, the white proteins provide some viscosity thanks to their large size and  loose   associations   with   each   other,   so   they   have   some   value   as   emulsion  stabilizers.
Cold Egg Sauces: Mayonnaise  Mayonnaise is an emulsion of oil droplets suspended in a base composed of egg  yolk, lemon juice or vinegar, water, and often mustard, which provides both flavor  and stabilizing particles and carbohydrates (p. 417). It’s the sauce most tightly  packed with oil droplets — as much as 80% of its volume is oil — and is usually  dense and too stiff to pour. It can be thinned and flavored with various water-  based liquids, including purees and stocks, or it can enrich such liquids the way  cream does; it can also be aerated with the addition of whipped cream or egg  whites. As a room-temperature preparation, mayonnaise is generally served with  cold dishes of various sorts. But thanks to the yolk proteins, it also reacts usefully to  heat. It lends body and richness when added to thin broths and briefly cooked;  and when layered onto fish or vegetables and broiled, it moderates the heat, puffs  up and sets into a rich coating.  Traditionally, mayonnaise is made with raw egg yolks, and therefore carries a slight  risk of salmonella infection. Manufacturers use pasteurized yolks, and cooks  concerned about salmonella can now find pasteurized eggs in supermarkets. Both  vinegar and extra-virgin olive oil kill bacteria, but mayonnaise is best treated as a  highly perishable food that should be served immediately or kept refrigerated.  Oil droplets in mayonnaise. A view through an electron microscope. Protein and  emulsifier molecules and aggregates, all from egg yolk, are present between the large  droplets and on their surfaces, and help prevent them from coalescing  Making Mayonnaise   All of the ingredients for making mayonnaise should be at
room temperature; warmth speeds the transfer of emulsifiers from the yolk  particles to the oil droplet surfaces. The simplest method is to mix together  everything but the oil — egg yolks, lemon juice or vinegar, salt, mustard — and  then whisk in the oil, slowly at first and more rapidly as the emulsion thickens.  However, the cook can produce more stable small droplets by whisking a portion  of the oil into just the yolks and salt to start, and then adding the remaining  ingredients when the emulsion gets stiff and needs to be thinned. The salt causes  the yolk granules to fall apart into its component particles, which makes the yolks  become both more clear and more viscous. If left undiluted, this viscosity will help  break the oil into smaller droplets.  Making mayonnaise. The cook begins with a small volume of the water phase —  mostly egg yolk — and slowly beats oil into droplets in this base (left). As more oil is  incorporated, the mixture becomes thicker and the oil is broken into smaller droplets  (center). When the sauce is done, as much as 80% of its volume is occupied by oil  droplets, and its consistency is semisolid (right).  Though cookbooks often say that the ratio of oil to egg yolk is critical, that one  yolk can only emulsify a half-cup or cup of oil, this just isn’t true. A single yolk can  emulsify a dozen cups of oil or more. What   is   critical is the ratio of oil to water:  there must be enough of the continuous phase for the growing population of oil  droplets to fit into. For every volume of oil added, the cook should provide about a  third of that volume in the combination of yolks, lemon juice, vinegar, water, or
some other water-based liquid.  A Sensitive Sauce   Because mayonnaise is chock-full of oil, so much so that the  droplets press up against each other, its emulsion is easily damaged by extremes  of cold, heat, and agitation. It will tend to leak oil in near-freezing refrigerators and  on hot rather than warm food. These problems are ameliorated in manufactured  mayonnaise by the addition of stabilizers, usually long carbohydrate or protein  molecules that fill the spaces between droplets. American bottled “salad dressing”  is a very stable hybrid of mayonnaise and a boiled white sauce made with water  instead of milk. The texture of such modified sauces, however, is noticeably  different from the dense, creamy original. Refrigerated mayonnaise should be  handled gently, since some oil may have crystallized and escaped from their  droplets. If so, stir gently to reemulsify it, perhaps with the addition of a few drops  of water.  Olive Oil Can Make Crazy Mayonnaise  Mayonnaise can be made with any kind of oil. One popular choice, unrefined  extra virgin olive oil, often produces an unstable mayonnaise, one that forms  properly, but then separates just an hour or two later. Ironically, the likely  troublemakers are molecules with emulsifying abilities: oil molecules that  have been broken into fragments that have a fat-like tail and water-soluble  head, just like lecithin (p. 802). They are concentrated in the oil, and when the  cook breaks the oil into droplets, they move to the droplet surface, where  they end up pushing the bulkier, more effective egg emulsifiers off the  droplet surfaces. Because the droplets are crowded tightly together, this  causes the droplets to coalesce and form puddles of oil.  This delayed disintegration of olive-oil mayonnaise is well known in Italy,  where the sauce is said to “go crazy” ( impazzire ). Old and improperly stored  oils are most likely to have suffered damage to their oil molecules and  therefore to cause problems in mayonnaise. Two ways to avoid crazy  mayonnaise are to use refined olive oil, and to use extra-virgin oil as a  flavoring, with the bulk of the oil being any flavorless refined oil.
Alternative Oil Emulsions  These days we think of mayonnaise exclusively as an egg-emulsified sauce,  but this hasn’t always been the case, and there are a number of other ways to  form and stabilize a flavorful oil emulsion. In 1828, perhaps a few decades  after the supposed invention of mayonnaise, the great chef and sauce-  systematizer Antonin Carême gave three recipes for   magnonnaise blanche,  only one of which includes egg yolks. The others are made with a ladleful of  starchy velouté or béchamel sauce, and with a gelatinous reduced extract of  veal meat and bones. In these versions, gelatin and milk proteins (in the  béchamel) are emulsifiers, and starch is a stabilizer. Some versions of the  herb-flavored Italian   salsa verde,   “green sauce,” emulsify olive oil with a hard-  boiled yolk and bread. The Provençal   aïoli   and Greek   skorthaliá   are emulsified  with a combination of pounded garlic and cooked potato; garlic and bread  are also used, as are fresh cheeses. None of these ingredients is as effective at  emulsifying and stabilizing as a raw egg yolk, so they will emulsify less oil and  the sauces will tend to leak some free oil.  Hot Egg Sauces: Hollandaise and Béarnaise  The classic hot egg sauces, hollandaise and béarnaise and their offspring, are egg-  emulsified butter sauces. They are similar to mayonnaise in many respects, but of  course must be hot to keep the butter fluid. Their dispersed fat phase is usually a  smaller proportion of the sauce, between one-and two-thirds of the total volume.  Hollandaise and béarnaise differ mainly in seasoning; hollandaise is only lightly  flavored with lemon juice, while béarnaise begins with a tart and aromatic  reduction of wine, vinegar, tarragon, and shallots.  Heat Thickens — and Curdles   The consistency of the hot egg sauces depends on  two factors. One is the form and amount in which the butter is incorporated.  Whole butter is about 15% water, so each addition thins the egg phase and the  sauce as a whole; clarified butter is all butterfat, and thickens the sauce with every  addition. The second influence on consistency is the degree to which the egg yolks  are heated and thickened. The main trick in making these sauces is to heat the egg
yolks enough to obtain the desired thickness, but not so much that the yolk  proteins coagulate into little solid curds and the sauce separates. This happens at  around 160–170ºF/70–77ºC. A double boiler or a saucepan resting above a larger  pan of simmering water will guarantee a gentle and even heat but will also slow  the cooking; for this reason, some cooks prefer the riskier but rapid direct heat of a  burner. Heating the yolks with the acidic reduction also minimizes curdling; if the  pH is around 4.5, the equivalent of yogurt’s acidity, the yolks can be safely heated  to 195ºF/90ºC. (The acid causes the proteins to repel each other, so that they  unfold before bonding to each other and form an extended network rather than  dense curds.) Cooks concerned about salmonella should make sure the yolks are  cooked at least to 160ºF/70ºC, or else should use pasteurized eggs.  Making Hollandaise and Béarnaise   There are at least five different ways of  making hollandaise and béarnaise, each with its advantages and disadvantages.  •   Cook the egg and water-based ingredients first to a thick consistency, then  whisk in pats of whole butter to emulsify the butterfat and thin the  continuous phase. This is Carême’s method, and is the trickiest because the  small volume of the initial egg mixture is easily overcooked.  •   Warm the yolks and water-based ingredients, whisk in either whole or  clarified   butter,   then   cook   the   mixture   until   it   reaches   the   desired  consistency. This is Escoffier’s method, and has the advantage that the cook  can control the final consistency directly, and by heating the entire volume  of sauce.  •   Put all of the ingredients for the sauce in a cold saucepan, turn the heat on  low, and start stirring. The butter gradually melts and releases itself into the  egg phase as both heat up together, and the cook then continues to heat  the formed sauce until it reaches the desired consistency. This is the simplest  method.  •   Don’t cook the yolks at all; just warm them and the water-based ingredients  above the melting point of butter, then whisk clarified butter in until the  crowding of droplets creates the desired consistency. This is essentially a  butter mayonnaise, and eliminates the possibility of overcooking the yolks.  •   Make the butter-sauce version of a sabayon (p. 639). Whisk the egg yolks and  some water while heating them until they form an airy foam, and then  gently incorporate melted or clarified butter and the lemon juice or acid  reduction. This version is of course much lighter, and is also made with less
butter per yolk.  It’s possible to make hot egg sauces with fats and oils other than butter, and to  flavor the water phase with meat reductions or vegetable purees.  Holding and Salvaging Hot Egg Sauces   Butter sauces need to be kept warm to  prevent the butter from solidifying, and are best held at around 145ºF/63ºC to  discourage the growth of bacteria. Because the egg proteins slowly continue to  bond to each other at this temperature, the cook should stir the sauce occasionally  to keep it from thickening. The container should be covered to prevent the sauce’s  moisture from evaporating and overcrowding the fat droplets, and to prevent the  formation of a protein skin on the surface.  Curdled egg sauces can be rescued by straining out the solid bits of protein,  keeping the whole mess warm, beginning with another warm egg yolk and one  tablespoon/15 ml water, and slowly whisking the sauce into the new yolk. The  same technique will revive a sauce that has been refrigerated and so had its  butterfat crystallized; the crystals melt to form fat puddles when the sauce is  simply rewarmed.  Vinaigrettes  A Water-in-Oil Emulsion   The most commonly and easily made emulsified sauce is  the simple oil-and-vinegar salad dressing known as   vinaigrette,   from the French  word for “vinegar.” Vinaigrette does a good job of clinging to lettuce leaves and  other vegetables, and lending a refreshing tart counterpoint to their taste. The  standard proportions for a vinaigrette are 3 parts oil to 1 vinegar, similar to the  proportions in mayonnaise, but the preparation is much simpler. The liquids and  other flavorings — salt, pepper, herbs — are often simply shaken into a cloudy,  temporary emulsion at the last minute, then poured onto and mixed with the  salad. When made in this casual way, a vinaigrette is the odd sauce out: instead of  being oil droplets dispersed in water, it’s water (vinegar) droplets dispersed in oil.  Without the help of an emulsifier, one part of water simply cannot accommodate  three parts of oil, so the more voluminous phase, the oil, becomes the continuous  phase.  There are good reasons for making oil the continuous phase of a vinaigrette, and  for not worrying about the stability of the emulsion. Where many sauces are  served under or atop large pieces of food, oil-and-vinegar emulsions are used
almost exclusively as salad dressings, whose role is to provide a very fine and even  coat for the extensive surface area of lettuce leaves and cut vegetables. A thin,  mobile sauce is more effective at this than a thick, creamy one, and oil adheres to  the vegetable surfaces better than the water-based vinegar, whose high surface  tension causes it to bead up rather than leave a film. And because the sauce is so  spread out, it doesn’t matter as much that the dispersed droplets be carefully  stabilized. Because water and oil are antagonists, the salad fixings should be well  dried before they’re tossed with vinaigrette; surfaces wet with water will repel the  oil.  Making a vinaigrette dressing. The proportion of oil to the water phase in a vinaigrette  is similar to the proportion in mayonnaise, but in a vinaigrette the water is the phase  dispersed in droplets, and the oil is the continuous phase. This emulsion is much less  crowded with droplets, and accordingly a vinaigrette is more fluid than mayonnaise.  Untraditional Vinaigrettes   Nowadays the term   vinaigrette   is used very broadly to  mean almost any kind of emulsified sauce enlivened with vinegar, whether water-  in-oil or oil-in-water, cold or hot, destined for salads or vegetables or meats or fish.  You can make an   oil-in-water version   simply by changing the proportions:  reducing the oil content and diluting the vinegar with other watery ingredients to  provide more of the continuous phase without excessive acidity. Creamy but thin  oil-in-water vinaigrettes can spread and cling reasonably well, and have the  advantage over a classic vinaigrette of being slower to discolor and wilt lettuce  leaves. (Oil seeps through breaks in the waxy leaf cuticle and spreads into the leaf  interior, where it displaces air and causes the leaf to darken and its structure to
collapse.)  Inventive cooks now make vinaigrettes with a variety of fats, including flavorsome  olive and nut oils, neutral vegetable and seed oils, melted butter, and even hot  meat and poultry fats (pork, duck); the water phase may contain vegetable or fruit  juices or purees, meat juices or stock reductions; and the droplets may be  emulsified or stabilized by thorough pulverizing to a small size in a blender, or with  pounded herbs or spices, vegetable purees, mustard, gelatin, or cream. Today’s  vinaigrette is a very versatile kind of sauce!  Bottled salad dressings that look like vinaigrettes are generally stabilized and given  body with starch or carbohydrate gums, which in low-fat versions can produce a  slimy consistency.  Sauces Thickened with Bubbles: Foams  Like emulsions, foams are a dispersion of one fluid in another. In the case of foams,  the fluid is not a liquid, but a gas, and the dispersed particles are not droplets, but  bubbles. Still, the bubbles do the same thing that droplets do in a sauce: they get  in the way of water molecules in the sauce, prevent them from flowing easily, and  thus give the sauce as a whole a thicker body. At the same time, they provide two  unique characteristics: a large surface area in contact with air that can enhance the  release of aromas to the nose; and a light insubstantiality and evanescence that  offers a refreshing contrast to the texture of nearly any food they accompany.  There’s one classic foam sauce, the sabayon, which is made by cooking and  whipping egg yolks at the same time to form a stable mass of bubbles. And both  whipped cream and whipped egg whites can be folded with their bubbles into any  water-based sauce. But cooks nowadays make foams from all kinds of water-based  liquids and semisolids that contain dissolved or suspended or structure-stabilizing  molecules   of   some   kind.   The   Catalan   chef   Ferran   Adrià   pioneered   this  development, with foams of — among other ingredients — cod, shellfish, foie  gras, asparagus, potatoes, raspberries, and cheese. Cooking broths and their  reductions, protein-and starch-thickened sauces, juices, purees, and emulsified  sauces can all be lightened by incorporating bubbles into them. And it’s a quick  last-minute preparation: just agitate some of the liquid until it froths, then scoop  off the bubble-rich portion, add it to the food, and serve.
Making and Stabilizing Foams  There are several different ways of getting bubbles into a liquid and stabilizing  them. Whipping with a whisk or hand-heldblender introduces air by agitating the  liquid surface; the foaming wands on espresso machines shoot steam, a mixture of  water vapor and air; and foaming devices for whipped cream and seltzer water mix  a stream of pressurized carbon dioxide or nitrous oxide with the liquid. Any  dissolved or suspended molecules in the liquid collect at the interface of the air  and liquid and give the bubble wall some solid reinforcement.  However, the reinforcement will be momentary and the bubbles short-lived unless  the molecules can form a stable layer at the interface. This is exactly what  emulsifiers like lecithin and proteins do, and for the same reason that they stabilize  oil droplets in emulsions: they have a water-soluble portion that rests in the  bubble wall, and a water-insoluble portion that rests in the air. Because the  bubbles in a typical foam are between 0.1 and 1 millimeter across, much larger  than most emulsion droplets, they require very little emulsifier to cover their  surface area, typically just 0.1% of the liquid weight (1 gram per quart or liter).  Stabilizing Foams   A liquid that is even modestly supplied with proteins or yolk  phospholipids will form an impressive mass of bubbles, solid enough to stand up  without flowing or even slumping. However, the foam may still collapse within a  minute or two. Air and water have very different densities, so when the foam is left  to stand on its own, the air bubbles rise while gravity pulls the liquid in their walls  in the opposite direction. This means that liquid drains from the bubble walls,  which also lose water to evaporation. Eventually, the foam at the surface becomes  dry, around 95% air and just 5% liquid, the bubble walls become too thin, fail, and  the bubbles pop.  This instability of the foam as a whole can be prevented by the same materials that  stabilize the emulsified sauces: namely materials that interfere with the free  movement of water molecules, and thereby slow the drainage and thinning of the  bubble walls. Foam stabilizers include the microscopic particles in purees, proteins,  thickening carbohydrates like starch, pectin, and gums — and even emulsified fat.  Free fat or oil is a foam killer, because the fat spreads at the interface with the air —  it’s chemically   more compatible with   air than   with   water —   and prevents  emulsifiers from settling at the interface and stabilizing it. However, if the fat is  emulsified — for example in an egg yolk or yolk-based sauce — then it remains
dispersed in the water phase, and its droplets only interfere with the flow of liquid  from the bubble walls.  Heat-Stabilized Foams: Sabayons   Both the method and the name of the French  sabayon derive from the Italian   zabaglione , a sweet, winy foam of egg yolks (p.  113). Though rich in proteins and phospholipids, egg yolks don’t foam well on their  own because they don’t contain enough water. Add water and beat and they foam  prodigiously but temporarily; heat while beating and the yolk proteins unfold and  bond to each other into a thickening, stabilizing network. This is how sabayons are  made, with the water replaced by a flavorful liquid of some some sort, a broth or  juice or puree for example. The hot egg-emulsified butter sauces can be made in  the style of a sabayon, with the butter folded in gently at the end so as not to pop  too many of the foam bubbles. (The butter doesn’t need to be beaten in because  the foam has created a large surface area over which the butter can spread and  stay suspended, much as a vinaigrette is spread over lettuce leaves.) The proteins  in aerated yolks thicken around 120ºF/50ºC, and may coagulate and separate if  heated much above that, so many cooks prepare sabayons over a pot of hot water  rather than over direct stovetop heat.  Salt  The word   sauce   comes via Latin from anancient root word meaning “salt,” the  primordial condiment that was prepared by the earth billions of years before early  humans learned to enliven their foods with it. Salt is an important flavoring, but  also much more than that, and is an ingredient in nearly every preparation  described in this book. The relevant chapters explain its role in the making of such  foods as cheese, cured meats and fish, pickled vegetables, boiled vegetables, soy  sauce, and bread. Here are a few pages about salt itself.  The Virtues of Salt   Salt is like no other substance we eat. Sodium chloride is a  simple, inorganic mineral: it comes not from plants or animals or microbes, but  from the oceans, and ultimately from the rocks that erode into them. It’s an  essential nutrient, a chemical that our bodies can’t do without. It’s the only natural  source of one of our handful of basic tastes, and we therefore add it to most of our  foods to fill out their flavor. Salt is also a taste enhancer and taste modifier: it  strengthens the impression of aromas that accompany it, and it suppresses the  sensation of bitterness. It’s one of the very few ingredients that we keep in pure
form at the table, to be added to individual taste as we eat.  In addition to   sauces   and   salads,   somewhat bitter leaves dressed to make them  more palatable, another food named for salt is   sausage,   one of the preparations in  which salt is more than just a flavoring. Thanks to its basic chemical nature, salt can  alter other ingredients in useful ways. Sodium chloride dissolves in water into  separate single atoms that carry electrical charge — positively charged sodium  ions and negatively charged chloride ions. These atoms are smaller and more  mobile than any molecule, and therefore readily penetrate our foods, where they  react in useful ways with proteins and with plant cell walls. And because a  concentrated solution of any kind draws water out of living cells by osmosis —  water in the less concentrated cell fluid moves out of the cell to relieve the  imbalance — the presence of sufficient salt in a food discourages the growth of  spoilage bacteria while allowing harmless flavor-producing (and salt-tolerant)  bacteria to grow. It thus preserves the food and improves it at the same time.  Salt is a remarkable ingredient. No wonder that people from earliest times have  found it indispensable, that it’s embedded in everyday words and sayings ( salary,  from the Roman practice of paying soldiers in salt;   worth his salt ;   salt of the earth ),  and that it has been the occasion for governmental monopolies and taxes and  popular revolts against them, from revolutionary France to Gandhi’s 1930 salt  march to Dandi.  Salt Production  People have been gathering crystalline salt since prehistoric times, both from the  seacoasts and from inland salt deposits. The rock-salt deposits, some of which are  hundreds of millions of years old, are masses of sodium chloride that crystallized  when ancient seas were isolated by rising land masses and evaporated, and their  beds then covered over by later geological processes. Until the 19th century, salt  was produced mainly for the preservation and flavoring of foods. Nowadays large  amounts are used in industrial manufacturing of all kinds, as well as in the de-icing  of winter roads, and salt production itself has been industrialized. Most rock salt is  now mined by solution, or pumping water into the deposits to dissolve the salt,  then evaporating the brine down in vacuum chambers to form solid crystals. While  some sea salt is still produced by gradual solar evaporation from open-air salt pans  in sufficiently warm, dry regions, much is now produced by more rapid vacuum
evaporation.  Removing Bitter Minerals   Salt comes from seawater, and seawater contains  significant quantities of several bitter minerals, the chloride and sulfate salts of  magnesium and calcium. Producers have a couple of ways of dealing with these  minerals. They can remove them from rock salt by dissolving the salt, then adding  sodium hydroxide and carbon dioxide to the brine to precipitate magnesium and  calcium. They can remove them from seawater by the same means, or else by slow  and gradual concentration in open-air pans, during which the calcium salts  become insoluble, crystallize, and settle before the sodium chloride does, and so  can be separated. The sodium chloride in turn crystallizes before the magnesium  salts, whose slight residue on the crystal surfaces can then be washed off in new  brine.  Crystal Shapes   These days both edible rock salt and sea salts are produced from  brines by evaporating the water away. The evaporation process determines the  kinds of salt crystals produced. If the brine becomes concentrated rapidly in a  closed tank and crystallization takes place throughout the brine, then many small,  regular cubic crystals are formed: the familiar granulated salt of the salt shaker.  However, if the evaporation proceeds slowly and at least partly in an open  container or sea-side pool, so that crystallization occurs primarily at the brine  surface, then the salt solidifies into fragile, hollow, pyramid-shaped flakes, a useful  shape for sticking to the surfaces of baked goods, and for dissolving rapidly. To be  preserved, the flakes must be scooped off the surface before they settle and sink  into the brine, where they fill in and become the large, coarse crystal often seen in  minimally processed sea salts.  Once collected and dried, both granular and flake salts can be rolled, compacted,  and crushed to make various particle sizes and shapes.  Kinds of Salt  Worldwide, about half of all salt production comes from the sea, and about half  from salt mines; in the United States, 95% is mined. Depending on how they’ve  been processed, edible salts range from 98 to 99.7% sodium chloride, with the  lower figures typical of table salts treated with anticaking additives.  Granulated Table Salt   Granulated table salts come in the form of small, regular,  cubic crystals, are the densest salts, and take the longest to dissolve. Standard
table salt is often supplemented with additives, as much as 2% of the total weight,  that prevent the crystal surfaces from absorbing moisture and sticking to each  other. These additives include aluminum and silicon compounds of sodium and  calcium, silicon dioxide — the material of glass and ceramics (p. 788) — and  magnesium carbonate. Other compounds called humectants may be added to  keep   these   additives from excessive drying and caking. Most anticaking additives  do not dissolve as readily as salt, and cloud the brines for pickled vegetables, so  specialized pickling salts omit them. These additives may also contribute slight  undesirable tastes of their own.  Iodized Salt   Many granulated table salts and some sea salts are fortified with  potassium iodide to help prevent devastating iodide deficiency (below). This  practice began in the United States in 1924. Because iodide is sensitive to acidity,  manufacturers usually supplement iodized salt with stabilizing traces of sodium  carbonate or thiosulfate and sugar. When dissolved in chlorinated tap water,  iodized salt can develop a distinct seaweed-like iodine odor, the result of a reaction  between the iodide and chlorine compounds.  Flake Salt   Flake salts come in flat, extended particles rather than compact, dense  granules. Flake salts are produced by surface evaporation of the mother brine, or  by mechanically rolling granulated salts. Maldon sea salt from the south coast of  England includes individual hollow-pyramid crystals measuring as much as a half-  inch/1 cm across. The large particles of flake salts and minimally processed sea  salts are easier to measure and add by the pinch. Sprinkled onto a food at the last  minute, flake salt provides a crunchy texture and a burst of flavor. The flat crystals  don’t pack together as compactly as cubic crystals, so a given volume measure of  flake salt weighs less than the same measure of granulated salt.  Kosher Salt   Kosher salt is salt used for the koshering process, the preparation of  meats according to Jewish dietary laws (p. 143). It comes in coarse particles, often  flakes, and is sprinkled on the freshly butchered meat for the purpose of drawing  out blood. Because it’s meant to remove impurities, the salt itself is not iodized.  Many cooks like to use kosher salt in general cooking for its relative purity and ease  of dispensing by hand.  Unrefined Sea Salt   Unrefined sea salts are produced in the way that agricultural  crops are: their beds are managed and tended, the salt is harvested when ready,  and minimally processed. The tending consists of a slow progressive concentration
of the seawater, and can take as much as five years. In most places the freshly  harvested salt is washed of its surface impurities before drying. Unrefined versions  are not systematically washed of their coating of minor minerals, algae and a few  salt-tolerant bacteria. They therefore carry traces of magnesium chloride and  sulfate and calcium sulfate, as well as particles of clay and other sediments that  give the crystals a dull gray cast (unrefined French salts are called   sel gris,   “gray  salt”). Because taste and aroma compounds are often detectable in minute  concentrations, and these salts include both organic and mineral impurities, it’s  possible that they would have a more complex flavor than refined salts, though  that complexity would be overwhelmed by any food to which the salt is added.  Fleur de sel   Fleur de sel, literally “flower of salt,” meaning the finest and most  delicate, is a special product of the sea-salt beds of west-central France. It consists  of the crystals that form and accumulate at the surface of the salt pans when the  humidity and breezes are right; they’re gently raked off the surface before they  have a chance to fall below the surface, where the ordinary gray sea salt  accumulates. Fleur de sel forms delicate flakes, doesn’t carry the particles of  sediment that darken and dull the gray salt, but is said to carry traces of algae and  other materials that contribute a characteristic aroma. This is possible, since the  interface between water and air is where aroma molecules and other fatty  materials would concentrate; but to date the aroma of sea salts has not been much  studied. Thanks to the labor required to make it, fleur de sel is expensive, and is  used as a last-minute condiment rather than as a cooking salt.  Flavored and Colored Salts   In addition to providing its own saltiness, salt is  sometimes turned into a carrier for other flavors and for decorative colors.  Examples of flavored salts include celery salt with ground celery seeds, garlic salt  with dehydrated garlic granules, and the smoked and roasted salts found in Wales,  Denmark, and Korea. The “black salt” of India, more of a gray-pink when ground, is  an unrefined mixture of minerals with a sulfurous smell. Black and red Hawaiian  salts are made by mixing ordinary sea salt with finely ground lava, clay, or coral.  Salt and the Body  Salt and Blood Pressure   Sodium and chloride ions are essential components of  the system that keeps our general body chemistry in working balance. They mostly  remain in the fluid that surrounds all our cells, the   plasma,   the fluid portion of the
blood, where they balance the potassium and other ions inside the cells. It’s  estimated that we need something like 1 gram of salt per day, a requirement that  goes up with physical activity since we lose body fluids and minerals in sweat.  Thanks to its presence in nearly all manufactured foods, the average daily salt  intake in the United States is around ten times the requirement.  Medical scientists have long suspected that constant excessive salt intake results in  an excessive volume of plasma being contained in our blood vessels, and therefore  causes high blood pressure, which damages the blood vessels and increases the  risk of heart disease and stroke. However, low-salt diets have been found to lower  high blood pressure only modestly, and only in some people. And low-salt diets  have surprising side effects of their own, including undesirable increases in blood  cholesterol levels. At this time, it appears that the most beneficial nonmedical  influences on blood pressure are general dietary balance — more vegetables,  fruits, and seeds rich in potassium, calcium, and other minerals — together with  physical exercise that conditions the whole cardiovascular system.  Effects on Kidneys, Bones, and the Digestive System   Excess sodium is absorbed  from the blood and excreted by the kidneys, which help regulate many body  systems. High sodium levels thus have the potential for having indirect effects on  those systems. There’s evidence that they can cause loss of bone calcium and thus  increase our dietary calcium requirement, as well as worsening chronic kidney  disease.  Though our bodies have ways of diluting and excreting excessive doses of salt,  eating salty foods exposes the surfaces of our digestive system to potentially cell-  damaging concentrations. There is evidence from China and elsewhere in Asia that  diets high in salt increase the risk of several cancers of the digestive system.  Iodized Salt   Some salts do carry an undisputed health benefit. Iodized salts  include trace amounts of potassium iodide, and thus are a source of a mineral  that’s essential for proper functioning of the thyroid gland, which regulates the  body’s heat production, protein metabolism, and development of the nervous  system. Iodine is a chemical relative of chlorine and readily found in ocean fish,  seaweeds, and crops and animals raised near the seacoast. Iodine deficiency was  once common in inland areas, and is still a significant problem in rural China. It  causes both physical and mental impairment, especially in children.  Salt to Taste: Salt Preference   Both the sensitivity to salt and the preference for
saltiness in foods vary a great deal from person to person. They depend on several  factors, including inherited differences in the numbers and effectiveness of taste  receptors on the tongue, general health, age, and experience. Most young adults  can identify as salty a water solution with 0.05% salt, or 1 teaspoon in 10  quarts/liters, while people older than sixty years generally detect saltiness only at  double   that   concentration.   Many   manufactured   soups,   which   many   people  experience as moderately to very salty, are around 1% salt (10 grams, or 2  teaspoons per quart/liter), approximately the same concentration as our blood  plasma. Some may be 3% salt, which is the average salinity of seawater.  It appears that the basic liking for saltiness is innate in humans, no doubt because  salt is an essential nutrient. The preference for a certain   level   of saltiness is learned  through repeated eating experiences and the expectations they create in us.  Preferences can be changed by constant exposure to different salt levels, which  changes expectations. But this takes time, usually two to four months.  The Physical Properties of Salt  Salt generally remains a solid in the kitchen unless it’s dissolved. Room-  temperature water can dissolve around 35% of its weight in salt, to give a  saturated solution of 26% salt that boils at around 228ºF/109ºC at sea level.  The particle size of salt crystals determines how fast they will dissolve, a fact  that can make a big difference when adding salt to a low-moisture food, for  example to a bread dough that has been made by the autolysis method (p.  536). Flake salts may dissolve four to five times faster than granulated salt, and  finely ground salt nearly 20 times faster.  Solid salt crystals melt at 1,600ºF/800ºC, and evaporate at around  3,000ºF/1,500ºC, temperatures reached in wood fires and glowing coals,  which can vaporize salt and deposit a thin film on foods above them.  Object 11
Sugars, Chocolate, and Confectionery  Ordinary sugar is an extraordinary food. Sugar is pure sensation, crystallized  pleasure. All human beings share an innate liking for its sweetness, which we first  experience in mother’s milk, and which is the taste of the energy that fuels all life.  Thanks to this deep appeal, sugar and sugar-rich foods are now among the most  popular and widely consumed of all foods. In centuries past, when sugar was rare  and expensive, they were luxuries reserved for the wealthy and for the climax of  the meal. Today sugar is cheap, and manufactured sweets have become everyday,  casual pleasures, affordable and entertaining morsels. Some are soothing classics,  cream and sugar cooked into rich brown caramels, or clear sugar tinted to look like  a shard of stained glass. And others are provocative novelties with glaringly  unnatural colors, whimsical shapes, hidden pockets of hissing gas, and burningly  excessive doses of acidity or spice.  In the kitchen, sugar is a versatile ingredient. Because sweetness is one of a small  handful of basic taste sensations, cooks add sugar to dishes of all kinds to fill out  and balance their flavor. Sugar interferes usefully with the coagulation of proteins,  and so tenderizes the gluten network of baked goods and the albumen network of  custards and creams. If we heat sugar enough to break its molecules apart, it  generates both appealing colors and an increasing complexity of flavor: no longer  just sweetness, but acidity, bitterness, and a full, rich aroma. And sugar is a  sculptural material. Provide it with some moisture and high heat, and we can coax  from it a broad range of shapeable consistencies, creamy and chewy and brittle  and rock hard.  The story of sugar is not all sweetness and light. Its appeal was a destructive force  in the history of Africa and the Americas, whose peoples were enslaved to satisfy  the European hunger for it. And today, by displacing more nourishing foods from  our diet, sugar contributes indirectly to several modern diseases of affluence. Like  most good things in life, it’s best enjoyed in moderation. And like that other good  thing, fat, it’s easy to consume a lot of sugar in manufactured foods without  realizing it.  Chocolate, the cooked, sculptable paste of a South American tree seed, has been
married to sugar ever since its arrival in Europe nearly 500 years ago, and is in  some respects sugar’s complement. Where sugar is a single molecule purified from  complex plant fluids, chocolate is a mixture of hundreds of different molecules  produced by fermenting and roasting a plain bland seed. It’s one of the most  complex flavors we experience, and yet it lacks and is completed by basic, simple  sweetness.  Gathering honey in prehistoric times. This rock painting, found in the  Spider Cave at Valencia, Spain, dates back to about 8000   BCE   and appears  to show two people raiding a wild beehive. The leader (enlarged at right)  may be carrying a basket for the honeycomb. Artificial hives and the  domestication of bees are known from about 2500   BCE   in Egypt. (Redrawn  from H. Ransome, The Sacred Bee, 1937.)
The History of Sugars and Confectionery  Before Sugar: Honey  After mother’s milk, the first significant source of sweetness in human experience  must have been fruits. Some warm-climate fruits like the date can approach a  sugar content of 60%, and even temperate fruits become very sweet when they  dry out. But the most concentrated natural source of sweetness is honey, the  stored food of certain species of bees, which reaches 80% sugars. It’s clear from a  remarkable painting in the Spider Cave of Valencia that humans have gone out of  their way to collect honey for at least 10,000 years. The “domestication” of bees  probably goes back 4,000 years, judging by Egyptian hieroglyphs that show clay  hives.  However our ancestors obtained it, honey came to represent pleasure and  fulfillment to them, and is a prominent metaphor in some of the earliest literature  we know. A love poem inscribed 4,000 years ago on a Sumerian clay tablet  describes a bridegroom as “honeysweet,” the bride’s caress as “more savory than  honey,” and their bedchamber as “honeyfilled.” In the Old Testament, the promised  land is pictured several times as a land flowing with milk and honey, a metaphor of  delightful plenty that is itself used figuratively in the Song of Songs, where another  bridegroom chants, “Thy lips, O my spouse, drop as the honeycomb: honey and  milk are under thy tongue…”  Honey remained an important ingredient in both the food and culture of classical  Greece and Rome. The Greeks offered it in ceremonies to the dead and the gods,  and priestesses of the goddesses Demeter, Artemis, and Rhea were called   melissai :  the Greek   melissa,   like the Hebrew   deborah,   means “bee.” The prestige of honey  was due in part to its mysterious origins and to a belief that it was a little bit of  heaven   fallen   to   earth.   The   Roman   natural   historian   Pliny   speculated   in  entertaining detail on honey’s nature.  Honey comes out of the air…At early dawn the leaves of trees are found  bedewed with honey…Whether this is the perspiration of the sky or a sort of  saliva of the stars, or the moisture of the air purging itself, nevertheless it  brings with it the great pleasure of its heavenly nature.
It was more than 1,000 years before the true roles of flower and bee in the creation  of honey were uncovered (p. 663). In fact, honey making is the natural model for all  human sugar production. We too take sweet juices from plants and separate the  sugars from the water. Palm trees in South Asia, maple and birch trees in northern  forests, agave plants and maize stalks in the Americas: all these have provided the  sweet juices. But none of them has been as generous as sugarcane.  Sweet Manna  In the Old Testament book of Exodus, God fed the exiled Israelites with  manna,   which is described as “like coriander seed, white; and the taste of it  was like wafers made with honey.”   Today this term is used for the sugar-rich  secretion of certain trees and also certain insects. In the Middle East, the  tamarisk tree produces enough manna that Bedouin nomads can collect  several pounds in a morning, and go on to make halvah with it. The sugar  alcohol   mannitol   (p. 662) owes its name to the fact that it was first found in  and extracted from manna.  Sugar: Beginnings in Asia  Europe barely knew what we now consider ordinary table sugar until around 1100,  and it was a luxury until 1700. Our first major source of sucrose was the sugar cane,  Saccharum officinarum,   a 20-foot-tall member of the grass family with an unusually  high sucrose content — about 15% — in its fluids. Sugar cane originated in New  Guinea in the South Pacific and was carried by prehistoric human migration into  Asia. Sometime before 500   BCE , people in India developed the technology of  making unrefined, “raw” sugar by pressing out the cane juice and boiling it down  into a dark mass of syrup-coated crystals. By 350   BCE , Indian cooks were combining  this dark   gur   with wheat, barley, and rice flours and with sesame seeds to make a  variety of shaped confections, some of them fried. A couple of centuries later,  Indian medical texts distinguished among a number of different syrups and sugars  from cane, including crystals from which the dark coating had been washed. These  were the first refined white sugars.
Early Confectionery in Southwest Asia  Around the 6th century   CE , both the cane and sugar-making technology were  carried westward from the delta of the Indus River to the head of the Persian Gulf  and the delta of the Tigris and Euphrates rivers, where the Persians made sugar a  prized ingredient in their cooking. One modern survival of this esteem is the  sprinkling of large sugar crystals over a dish called “jeweled rice.” Islamic Arabs  conquered Persia in the 7th century and took the cane to northern Africa, Syria,  and eventually Spain and Sicily. Arab cooks combined sugar with almonds to make  marzipan paste, cooked it down with sesame seeds and other ingredients to make  chewy halvah, made great use of sugar in syrups aromatized with rose petals and  orange blossoms, and were pioneers in confectionery and in sugar sculpture. There  are records of a 10th-century feast in Egypt that was adorned with sugar models of  trees, animals, and castles!  Pulled Sugar and Almond Confection in 13th-century Baghdad  Medieval Arab cooks were among the first to explore sugar’s remarkable sculptural  qualities, as these early examples of pulled sugar and marzipan show.  Dry Halwa  Take sugar, dissolve in water, and boil until set: then remove from the dish,  and pour onto a soft surface to cool. Take an iron stake with a smooth head  and plant it in the mass, then pull up the sugar, stretching it with the hands  and drawing it up the stake all the time, until it becomes white: then throw  once more onto the surface. Knead in pistachios, and cut into strips and  triangles. If desired, it may be colored, either with saffron or with vermilion.  Faludhaj  Take a pint of sugar and one-third of a pint of almonds and grind both  together fine, then scent with camphor. Take one-third of a pint of sugar, and  dissolve in an ounce of rose-water over a slow fire, then remove. When  cooled, throw in the ground sugar and almonds, and knead. If the mixture  needs strengthening, add more sugar and almonds. Make into middling  pieces, melons, triangles, etc. Then lay on a dish and serve.  —   Kitab al Tabikh,   transl. A. J. Arberry
In Europe: A Spice and Medicine  Western Europeans first encountered sugar during their Crusades to the Holy Land  in the 11th century. Shortly thereafter Venice became the hub of the sugar trade  from Arab countries to the West, and the first large shipment to England that we  know of came in 1319. At first, Europeans treated sugar the way they treated  pepper, ginger, and other exotic imports, as a flavoring and a medicine. In  medieval Europe, sugar was used in two general sorts of preparations: preserved  fruits and flowers, and small medicinal morsels. Sweets, or candy, began not as  little entertaining treats but as “confections” (from the Latin   conficere,   “to put  together,”   “to prepare”) composed by the apothecaries, or druggists, to balance the  body’s principles. Sugar served several medicinal purposes. Its sweetness covered  the bitterness of some drugs and made all preparations more pleasant. Its  meltability and stickiness made it a good vehicle for mixing and carrying other  ingredients. The solidity of a fused mass of sugar meant that it could release its  medicine slowly and gradually. And its own supposed effect on the body —  encouraging both heat and moisture — was thought to balance the effects of  other foods and enhance the digestive process. A number of soothing medicinal  sweets remain popular to this day, including lozenges, pastilles, and comfits.  Food Words:   Sugar   and   Candy  Our language bears the traces of sugar’s passage from India through the  Middle East to Europe. The English word   sugar   comes from the Arabic  imitation of the Sanskrit   sharkara,   meaning gravel or small chunks of material;  candy   from the Arabic version of the Sanskrit for sugar itself,   khandakah.  Confectionery for Pleasure  It’s thought that the first nonmedical confection in Europe may have been made  around 1200 by a French druggist who coated almonds with sugar. Medieval  recipes from the French and English courts call for sugar to be added to fish and  fowl sauces, to ham, and to various fruit and cream-egg desserts. Chaucer’s Tale of
Sir Topas, a 14th-century parody of the chivalric romance, included sugar in a list of  “royal spicery,” along with gingerbread, licorice, and cumin. By the 15th century,  wealthy Europeans had come to appreciate the purely pleasurable virtues of sugar  and its ability to complement the flavors of many foods. The Vatican librarian  Platina wrote around 1475 that sugar was being produced in Crete and Sicily as  well as India and Arabia, and added,  The ancients used sugar only in medicines, and for this reason make no  mention of sugar in their foods. They certainly missed out on a great delight,  since nothing given us to eat is so flavorless that sugar cannot make it  savory…. By melting it, we make almonds…pine nuts, hazelnuts, coriander,  anise, cinnamon, and many other foods into beautiful things. The quality of  sugar then almost crosses over into the qualities of the things to which it  clings in the confection.  Advances in Confectionery   In the 15th and 16th centuries, confectionery became  more of an art, done with greater sophistication and intended more and more to  delight the eye. Molten sugar was now spun into delicate threads and pulled to  develop a satiny sheen, and confectioners began to develop ways of determining  the different states of a sugar syrup and their appropriateness to different  preparations. By the 17th century, court confectioners were making whole table  settings and massive decorations out of sugar, hard sugar candies had become  common, and cooks had developed systems for marking the syrup concentrations  suitable for different confections — ancestors of today’s thread-ball-crack scale  (see box, p. 651).  A Pleasure for All  Sugar became more widely available in the 18th century, when whole cookbooks  were devoted to confectionery. England developed an especially strong sugar  habit, and consumed large amounts in the tea and jams that fueled the working  class. The per capita consumption rose from 4 pounds/2 kg a year in 1700 to 12  pounds/5 kg in 1780. By contrast, the French limited their use of sugar mainly to  preserves and to desserts. In the 19th century, the growing production of sugar  from beets, and the development of machines that automated the cooking,  manipulation, and shaping of sugar preparations, brought inexpensive candies for
all and encouraged an inventiveness that continues to this day. It’s in the 19th  century that familiar modern candies and chocolates were invented, and the  control of crystallization was refined.   Taffy   or   toffee,   from the Creole for a mixture of  sugar and molasses, and   nougat,   from the vulgar Latin for “nut cake,” entered the  language early in the century;   fondant,   from the French for “melting,” the basic  material of fudge and all semisoft or creamy centers, was developed around 1850.  Most candy today is a variation of some kind on bonbons, taffy, and fondant.  Sugar as Disguise  The medicinal origins of confections live on in expressions that we use today.  While “honey” is almost invariably a term of praise, “sugar” is often ambivalent.  Sugary words, a sugary personality, suggest a certain calculation and  artificiality. And the idea of “sugaring over” something, the deception of  hiding something distasteful in a sweet shell, would seem to be taken directly  from the druggist’s confections. As early as 1400, the phrase, “Gall in his breast  and sugar in his face” was used, and Shakespeare has Hamlet say to Ophelia,  ’Tis too much prov’d, that with devotion’s visage  And pious action we do sugar o’er  The devil himself. (III.i)  The Rise of the Sugar Industry   The 18th-century explosion in European sugar  consumption was made possible by colonial rule in the West Indies and the  enslavement of millions of Africans. Columbus carried the cane to Hispaniola (now  Haiti and the Dominican Republic) on his second voyage in 1493. By about 1550,  the Spanish and Portuguese had occupied many Caribbean islands and the coasts  of   western   Africa,   Brazil,   Mexico,   and   were   producing   sugar   in   significant  quantities; English, French, and Dutch colonists followed in the next century. By  1700, some 10,000 Africans were being traded via the Portuguese colony São Tomé  to the Americas every year. The sugar industry was not the only force behind the  great expansion of slavery, but it probably was the major force and helped ease its  introduction into the southern American colonies and the cotton plantations.  According to one estimate, fully two-thirds of the 20 million Africans enslaved in
the Americas worked on sugar plantations. The intricate trade in sugar, slaves, rum,  and manufactured goods made major ports out of the hitherto minor cities of  Bristol and Liverpool in England, and Newport, Rhode Island. And the huge  fortunes made by plantation OWNERs helped finance the opening stages of the  Industrial Revolution.  In the 18th century, just when it seemed at its strongest, the West Indian sugar  industry began a rapid decline. The horrors of slavery gave rise to abolition  movements, especially in Britain. Slaves staged revolts, and received some support  from the very countries that had carried them to the plantations. One by one,  through   the   mid-19th   century,   European   countries   outlawed   slavery   in   the  colonies.  The Development of Beet Sugar   The severest blow to West Indian sugar was the  development of an alternative to the sugar cane that could grow in northern  climates. In 1747, a Prussian chemist, Andreas Marggraf, showed that by using  brandy to extract the juice of the white beet ( Beta vulgaris,   var.   altissima ), a  common European vegetable, he could isolate crystals that were identical to those  purified from sugar cane, and in comparable quantities. Marggraf foresaw a kind of  cottage industry by which individual farmers could satisfy their own needs for  sugar, but this never came about, and many years passed before the idea escaped  the laboratory. In 1811, the Emperor Napoleon officially set the goal of freeing  France from dependence on the English colonies for various commodities, and in  1812 personally awarded a medal to Benjamin Delessert, who had developed a  working sugar-beet factory. In the next year, 300 such factories sprang up. A treaty  resuming trade between France and England was signed in 1814, making West  Indian sugar available once again, and the fledgling industry crashed as suddenly  as it had begun. But it rose again in the 1840s and has flourished ever since.  Stages of Sugar Cooking in the 17th Century  This early system for recognizing the concentration of boiled sugar syrups  comes from   Le Confiturier françois.   Then as now, the confectioner needed  tough fingers.  Cookings of Sugar
The first is to the ribbon. It is reached when the syrup begins to thicken,  so that in taking it with the finger and putting it on the thumb, it  doesn’t flow, and remains round as a pea.  Cooked to the pearl. The second cooking is reached when, in taking the  syrup with the finger and putting it on the thumb, and opening the  fingers, it forms a small thread….  Cooked to the feather. This cooking has many different names…. It is  recognized by placing a spatula in the syrup, and shaking the syrup in  the air; the syrup flies away as if dry feathers without stickiness…. This  cooking is the one for preserves and tablets.  Cooking to the burning smell. This cooking is recognized when one dips  the finger in cool water, then in the sugar, and when putting the finger  back into the cool water, the sugar breaks neatly like a glass without  stickiness…. This cooking is for the large citron   biscuit , for caramel, and  pulled sugar, or   penide , and this is the last cooking of the sugar.  Sugar in Modern Times  At present, beet sugar accounts for about 30% of the sucrose produced in the  world. Russia, Germany, and the United States are the major beet growers, with  California, Colorado, and Utah the leading states. The Caribbean is now a minor  source of cane sugar, its role having been assumed by India and Brazil. Florida,  Hawaii, Louisiana, and Texas also produce sugar cane. Spurred by the demand of  an increasingly populous and affluent West, world sugar production increased  sevenfold between 1900 and 1964, a rate matched by no other major crop in  history. And thanks to the development of methods for making sweeteners from  corn, an even less expensive source, sugar has never been cheaper or more  abundant in our diet. This is not necessarily good for our long-term health (p. 657),  and one of the major developments in 20th-century food manufacturing has been  the development of ingredients that mimic the flavor and physical characteristics  of sugar without having adverse effects on body weight and the regulation of  blood sugar (p. 659).
Recipes for Caramel, Pulled Sugar, and Sugar Ham in the 17th Century  Caramelle  Make some sugar cooked to the burning smell, take it off the fire, put in  a little amber, rub a stone of marble or plate with oil of sweet almonds,  throw your caramel on in little pieces as if preserves, and take them up  with a spoon.  Twisted Sugar  Make some sugar cooked to the burning smell; take from the fire and  throw it on a marble stone that you have rubbed with sweet-almond  oil; rub your hands also, and work it well, have iron hooks to pull and  draw out, and dress as a wreathed marzipan.  Slices of Ham  Make some sugar cooked to the feather, put it in three containers; in  one put some lemon juice, in another some roses of Provence, and in  the other some powdered cochenille, or pomegranate juice or  powdered barberry. Make a layer of the white on some paper, two  layers of red, continue until the sugar has the thickness of a ham, and  cut it by the slice in the form of a slice of ham.  —   Le Confiturier françois  The Nature of Sugars  Ordinary sugar is one member of a group of many chemicals, all of which are given  the general name   sugars.   All sugars are made from just three kinds of atoms,  carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen, with the carbon atoms providing a kind of  backbone to which the other atoms are attached. Some sugars are simple  molecules, while others are made from two or more simple sugars joined together.  Glucose and fructose are simple   monosaccharides,   while table sugar, or sucrose, is a  disaccharide   made up of one glucose and one fructose joined together.
Sweets Around the World  Sugar is universally popular, but different cultures have made different uses of  it. Here are examples of sweets that are characteristic of some nations and  regions.  India   Reduced-milk sweets, deep-fried batters in syrup, halvah  (pastes of sugar, wheat, or chickpea flour, fruits, vegetables)  Middle East   Halvah (pastes of sugar syrup and semolina, sesame),  pastries in syrup (baklava), marzipan  Greece   Spoon fruits, pastries in syrup  France   Caramel, nougat, dragées  England,  United States  Novelty candies  Scandinavia   Licorice  Mexico   Dulce de leche (reduced milk), penuche (brown-sugar  fudge)  Japan   Agar jelly candies, bean-paste candies, sweet-rice mochi,  tea ceremony sweets  Living things put the sugars to two primary uses. The first is the storage of  chemical energy. All life depends on sugars for the energy that fuels the activity of  cells. This is why we have taste receptors that register the presence of sugars, and  why our brain attaches pleasure to that sensation: sweetness is the sign of a food  that can help supply our need for calories. The second major role for sugars is to  provide building blocks for physical structures, especially in plants. The cellulose,  hemicellulose, and pectin that give bulk and strength to plant cell walls are long  chains of various sugars. The simple physical bulk of sugar is also useful to the  cook, who can construct from it a variety of interesting textures.  One chemical characteristic of sugars is especially important in the kitchen. Sugars  have a strong affinity for water, so they readily dissolve in water, and form  temporary but strong bonds to water molecules in their vicinity. Sugars therefore  retain moisture in baked goods, keep frozen desserts from solidifying into a solid
block of ice, form a sticky matrix that holds food particles together in such things  as marzipan and granola bars, maintain a moist, glossy appearance in glazes, and  help preserve fruits by drawing moisture out of spoilage microbes and preventing  their growth.  Kinds of Sugar  The cook works with just a handful of the many different sugars in nature. All of  them are sweet, but each has its distinctive qualities.  Glucose   Glucose, also called   dextrose,   is a simple sugar, and the most common  sugar from which living cells directly extract chemical energy. Glucose is found in  many fruits and in honey, but always in a mixture with other sugars. It’s the  building block from which starch chains are constructed. Cooks encounter it most  often as the sweet substance in corn syrup, which is made by breaking starch  down into individual glucose molecules and small glucose chains (p. 677). A chain  of two glucoses is called   maltose.   Compared to table sugar, or sucrose, glucose is  less sweet, less soluble in water, and produces a thinner solution. It melts and  begins to caramelize at around 300ºF/150ºC.  Fructose   Fructose, also called   levulose,   has exactly the same chemical formula as  glucose, but the atoms are arranged in a different structure. Like glucose, fructose  is found in fruits and honey, and certain corn syrups are treated with enzymes to  convert their glucose into fructose. It’s also sold in pure crystalline form. Fructose is  the sweetest of the common sugars, the most soluble in water (4 parts will dissolve  in 1 part room-temperature water), and absorbs and retains water most effectively.  Our bodies metabolize fructose more slowly than glucose and sucrose, so it causes  a slower rise in blood glucose levels, a quality that makes it preferable to other  sugars for diabetics. Fructose melts and begins to caramelize at a much lower  temperature than the other sugars do, just above the boiling point of water at  220ºF/105ºC.  The fructose molecule exists in several different shapes when dissolved in water,  and the different shapes have different effects on our sweet receptors. The  sweetest shape, a six-corner ring, predominates in cold, somewhat acid solutions;  in warm or hot conditions, this shape shifts to less sweet five-corner rings. The  apparent sweetness of fructose is cut nearly in half at 140ºF/60ºC. Neither glucose  nor sucrose changes so drastically. Fructose is thus a useful substitute for table
sugar in cold drinks, where it can provide the same sweetness with half the  concentration and a calorie savings approaching 50%. In hot coffee, however, its  sweetness drops to the level of table sugar.  Common sugars. Carbon atoms are shown as dots. Glucose and fructose have the  same chemical formula, C 6 H 12 O 6 , but different chemical structures, and different  degrees of sweetness. A given concentration of fructose tastes much sweeter than the  same concentration of glucose. Table sugar, or sucrose, is a combination of glucose  and fructose (a molecule of water is released when the two sugars bond to make  sucrose).  Sucrose   Sucrose is the scientific name for table sugar. It is a composite molecule  made of one molecule each of glucose and fructose. Green plants produce sucrose  in the process of photosynthesis, and we extract it from the stalks of sugar cane  and the storage stems of sugar beets. Of all the common sugars, it has the most  useful combination of properties. It is the second sweetest, after fructose, but is  alone in having a pleasant taste even at the very high concentrations found in  candies and preserves; other sugars can seem harsh. Sucrose is also the second  most soluble sugar — two parts can dissolve in one part of room-temperature  water — and it produces the greatest viscosity, or thickness, in a water solution.  Sucrose   begins   to   melt   around   320ºF/160ºC,   and   caramelizes   at   around  340ºF/170ºC.  When a solution of sucrose is heated in the presence of some acid, it breaks apart  into its two subsugars. Certain enzymes will do the same thing. Breaking sucrose  into glucose and fructose is often referred to as   inversion,   and the resulting mixture  is called   invert sugar   or   invert syrup.   (“Inversion” refers to a difference in optical  properties between sucrose and a mixture of its components parts.) Invert syrups  are about 75% glucose and fructose, 25% sucrose. Invert sugar only exists as a
syrup, since the fructose component won’t fully crystallize in the presence of  glucose and sucrose. Sucrose inversion and invert sugars are useful in candy  making because they help limit the extent of sucrose crystallization (p. 685).  Lactose   Lactose is the sugar found in milk. It is a composite of two simple sugars,  glucose and galactose. Cooks seldom encounter it in pure form. Because it’s much  less sweet than table sugar, manufacturers use it much as they do the sugar  alcohols (p. 662), more for its physical bulk than for its sweetness.  The Complexities of Sweetness  There’s more to the sweetness of sugars than the sensation of sweetness pure and  simple. Sweetness helps mask or balance both sourness and bitterness from other  ingredients. And flavor chemists have shown that it has a strong enhancing effect  on our perception of food aromas, perhaps by signaling the brain that the food is a  good energy source and therefore deserves special attention.  Different sugars give different impressions of sweetness. Sucrose takes some time  to be detected on the tongue, and its sweetness lingers. By comparison, the  sweetness of fructose registers quickly and strongly, but it also fades quickly. And  corn syrup is slow to taste sweet, peaks at about half the intensity of sucrose, and  lingers even longer than sucrose. The quick action of fructose is said to enhance  certain other flavors in foods, especially fruitiness, tartness, and spiciness, by  allowing us to perceive them clearly without the masking effect of residual  sweetness.  The Composition and Relative Sweetnesses of Different Sugars  Sugar sweetness is designated by comparison to the sweetness of table sugar,  which is assigned a value of 100.  Sugar   Composition   Sweetness  Fructose   -   120  Glucose   -   70  Sucrose (table sugar)   -   100  Maltose   -   45
Sugar   Composition   Sweetness  Lactose   -   40  Corn syrup   Glucose, maltose   30–50  High-fructose corn syrup   Fructose, maltose   80–90  Invert sugar syrup   Glucose, fructose, sucrose   95  Crystallization  Sugars are wonderfully robust materials! Unlike proteins that easily denature and  coagulate, unlike fats that are damaged by air and heat and go rancid, unlike  starch chains that break apart into smaller chains of glucose molecules, sugars  themselves are small and stable molecules. They mix easily with water, tolerate the  heat of boiling, and when sufficiently concentrated in water, they readily bond to  each other and collect themselves into pure, solid masses, or crystals. This  tendency to form crystals is the means by which we obtain pure sugar from plant  juices, and it’s the way that we make many kinds of candies. Sugar crystallization is  described in detail on p. 682.  Caramelization  Caramelization   is the name given to the chemical reactions that occur when any  sugar is heated to the point that its molecules begin to break apart. This  destruction triggers a remarkable cascade of chemical creation. From a single kind  of molecule in the form of colorless, odorless, simply sweet crystals, the cook  generates hundreds of new and different compounds, some of them small  fragments that are sour or bitter, or intensely aromatic, others large aggregates  with no flavor but a deep brown color. The more the sugar is cooked, the less sugar  and sweetness remain, and the darker and more bitter it gets.  Though caramel is most often made with table sugar, its sucrose molecules  actually break apart into their glucose and fructose components before they begin  to   fragment   and   recombine into   new   molecules.   Glucose   and   fructose   are  “reducing sugars,” meaning that they have reactive atoms that perform the
opposite of oxidation (they donate electrons to other molecules). A sucrose  molecule is made from one glucose and one fructose joined by their reducing  atoms, so sucrose has no reducing atoms free to react with other molecules, and is  therefore less reactive than glucose and fructose. This is why sucrose requires a  higher temperature for caramelization (340ºF/170ºC) than glucose (300ºF/150ºC)  and especially fructose (220ºF/105ºC).  The flavors of caramelization. Heat transforms table sugar, a sweet, odorless, single  kind of molecule, into hundreds of different molecules that generate a complex flavor  and rich brown color. A few aromatic examples (clockwise from top left) : alcohol,  sherry-like acetaldehyde, vinegary acetic acid, buttery diacetyl, fruity ethyl acetate,  nutty furan, solvent-like benzene, and toasty maltol.  Making Caramel   The usual technique for making caramel is to mix table sugar  with some water, then heat until the water has boiled off and the molten sugar  colors. Why add water if the first thing you do is boil it off? Water makes it possible  to cook the sugar over high heat from the very beginning without the danger of  burning it. In addition, the presence of water prolongs the period during which the  syrup is cooked, gives these reactions more time to proceed, and develops a  stronger flavor than heating the sugar on its own very quickly. And water enhances  the conversion of sucrose into its glucose and fructose components. Cooking the  syrup in the microwave oven has been found to produce a somewhat different  spectrum of flavors than ordinary stovetop cooking.  Once caramelization and color and flavor generation begin, the overall set of  reactions actually gives off heat, and can run away and burn the sugar if it’s not
carefully controlled. It’s helpful to have a bowl of cold water ready to cool the pan  down as soon as the caramel is done. Excessive caramelization turns the syrup very  dark, bitter, and viscous or even solid.  Food Words:   Caramel  Our word for browned sugar may come from its resemblance in color to straw.  Caramel   first appears in French in the 17th century as a borrowing via Spanish  from the Portuguese   caramel,   which meant both the elongated sugar loaf and  “icicle,” perhaps because they shared a similar shape and sparkly appearance.  The Portuguese in turn seems to derive from the Latin   calamus,   meaning  “reed.”   The Greek   kalamos   meant “straw,” and the original Indo-European root  meant “grass.”   The Italian   calamari,   “squid,” comes from the same root! Perhaps  the common element is the brown color of dry grass, partly refined sugar,  cooked sugar syrup, and camouflaging squid skin.  The Flavor of Caramelized Sugar   The aroma of a simple caramelized sugar has  several different notes, among them buttery and milky (from diacetyl), fruity  (esters and lactones), flowery, sweet, rum-like, and roasted. As the reactions  proceed, the taste of the mixture becomes less sweet as more of the original sugar  is destroyed, with more pronounced acidity and eventually bitterness and an  irritating, burning sensation. Some of the chemical products in caramel are  effective antioxidants and can help protect food flavors from damage during  storage.  When sugars are cooked with ingredients that include proteins or amino acids —  milk or cream, for example — then in addition to true caramelization, some of the  sugars participate with the proteins and amino acids in the Maillard browning  reactions (p. 778), which produce a larger range of compounds and a richer aroma.
Caramel Food Colorings  Cooks have been confecting caramel candies and syrups for many centuries,  and have been making “burnt” sugar for its brown color since ancient times.  The commercial production of caramel syrups as food colorings began in  Europe and the United States in the middle of the 19th century. They’re now  the most common food coloring, and provide the deep brown of colas, root  beers and other soft drinks, spirits, candies, and many prepared foods. In  addition to color, the pigment molecules also have some antioxidant activity  that helps preserve flavor. Caramel colors were originally produced by heating  sugar syrup in an open pan. With time, closed vacuum pans were introduced  to control color development more finely, and manufacturers began to add  various chemicals to obtain pigments with good dispersing or emulsifying  properties.  Sugars and Health  “Empty Calories”   In one sense, sugars are highly nourishing. Pure sugars are pure  energy. After fats and oils, they’re the most concentrated source of calories we  have. The problem is that most people in the developed world consume more  energy than they need to fuel their activity, and less than they need of hundreds of  other nutrients and plant substances that contribute to long-term health (p. 253).  To the extent that sugar-rich foods displace more broadly nourishing foods from  our diet, they are detrimental to human health, a source of calories “empty” of any  other nutritional value, and a major contributor to the modern epidemic of obesity  and associated health problems, including diabetes (p. 659).  People in the developed world, particularly in the United States, consume large  amounts of refined sugars. Adults in the United States get about 20% of their  calories from refined sugars, children between 20% and 40%. Most of this sugar  intake comes not from candies and confections, but from soft drinks. Significant  amounts of sugar also find their way into most processed foods, including many  savory sauces, dressings, meats, and baked goods. The total sugar content in  processed foods is often unclear from the ingredients list, where different sugars
can be listed separately as sucrose, dextrose, levulose, fructose, corn syrup, high-  fructose corn syrup, etc.  Sugars and Tooth Decay   It has been common knowledge for thousands of years  that sweet foods encourage tooth decay. In the Greek book of   Problems   attributed  to Aristotle, the question is asked, “Why do figs, which are soft and sweet, destroy  the teeth?” Nearly 2,000 years later, as sugar cane was being established in the  West Indies, a German visitor to the English court named Paul Hentzner described  Queen Elizabeth I as she appeared in 1598:  Next came the Queen, in the Sixty-fifth Year of her Age, as we were told, very  majestic; her Face oblong, fair, but wrinkled; her Eyes small, yet black and  pleasant; her Nose a little hooked; her Lips narrow, and her Teeth black; (a  defect the English seem subject to, from their too great use of Sugar)…  We now know that certain kinds of   Streptococcus   bacteria colonize the mouth and  cling to undisturbed surfaces, where they live on food residues, converting sugars  into   sticky “plaque” carbohydrates   that   anchor   and   protect   them,   and   into  defensive acids that eat away at tooth enamel and so cause decay. Clearly, the  more food there is for the bacteria, the more active they will be, and hard sugar  candies that slowly dissolve in the mouth provide a feast for them. But pure sugar  is not the only culprit in tooth decay. Starchy foods like bread, cereals, pasta, and  potato chips are also harmful because they stick to the teeth and then are broken  down into sugars by enzymes in the saliva. A few other foods, notably chocolate,  cocoa, and licorice extract among candy ingredients, as well as coffee, tea, beer,  and some cheeses, actually inhibit decay-causing bacteria. There’s evidence that  phenolic compounds interfere with the adhesion of bacteria to the teeth. The  sugar alcohols in low-calorie candies (p. 662) are generally not metabolized by  bacteria in the mouth and don’t contribute to tooth decay.  Food Sugars and Blood Sugar: The Problem of Diabetes   Some foods rich in  sugars can contribute to the disruption of the body’s system for controlling its own  sugar levels. Glucose is the body’s primary form of chemical energy, so it’s  distributed to all cells via the blood. On the other hand, glucose is a reactive  molecule, and excess quantities can damage the circulatory system, eyes, kidneys,  and nervous system. So the body tightly regulates blood glucose levels, and does  so with the hormone insulin. Diabetes is a disease in which the insulin system is  unable to control blood glucose adequately. And a high intake of some food
sugars overloads the blood with glucose and puts stress on the insulin system. This  is dangerous for people who suffer from diabetes. The foods that raise blood  glucose levels the most are foods rich in glucose itself, including such starchy  foods as potatoes and rice that our enzymes digest into glucose. Table sugar, a  combination of glucose and fructose, has a somewhat smaller effect, and fructose  itself has a much smaller effect, since it must be metabolized in the liver before the  body can use it for energy. One valuable property of many sugar substitutes is that  they do not raise blood sugar levels.  The Glycemic Index of Various Sugars and Foods  The “glycemic index” is a measure of how much a given food raises blood  glucose levels. The glycemic index of glucose itself is set at 100.  Sugar   Glycemic Index  Maltose   110  Glucose   100  Potatoes   95  White rice   95  Honey   90  Table sugar   90  Banana   60  Fruit preserves   55  Fructose   20  Sugar Substitutes  Sugars combine several useful qualities in one ingredient: energy, sweetness,  substance, moisture binding, and the ability to caramelize. The problem with this  versatility is that each quality comes with the others. And sometimes we want just  one or two alone: the pleasure of sweetness without the calories or stress on the
body’s system for regulating blood sugar levels, for example, or the substance  without the sweetness, or substance and sweetness without the tendency to  brown when cooked. Manufacturers have therefore developed ingredients that  offer some but not all of the properties of sugars. Many of these ingredients were  originally discovered in plants; a few are entirely artificial. Inventive cooks are now  experimenting with some to make candy-like savory foods and other novelties.  There   are   two   main   kinds   of   sugar   substitutes.   The   first   includes   various  carbohydrates that provide bulk without being as digestible as the sugars. They  therefore don’t raise blood sugar levels as quickly, and supply fewer calories. The  second is high-intensity sweeteners: molecules that provide the sensation of  sweetness without supplying many calories, usually because they are hundreds or  thousands of times sweeter than sugar, and are used in tiny quantities. Low-and  no-calorie sweets are made by combining these two kinds of ingredients, whose  qualities are summarized in the chart on pp. 660–661.  Some Sugar Substitutes and Their Qualities  In this table, the sweetness of table sugar is represented as 100. A sweetness  of 50 means that the substance is half as sweet as table sugar; a sweetness of  500 means that it is 5 times sweeter. The sugar alcohols and corn syrups with  sweetnesses less than 1 are mainly useful for providing bulk and viscosity  with reduced calories and effects on blood sugar. The intensive sweeteners,  with sweetnesses greater than 100, provide taste with reduced calories and  effects on blood sugar. Even those sugar substitutes that were originally  found in nature are now manufactured by chemical modification of a natural  or synthetic starting material.  Ingredient   Relative  Sweetness  Original  Source  Date of   Com-  mercialization  Notable Qualities  Polydextrose  (Litesse)  0   Glucose  (modified)  1980s   Produces high  viscosities  Corn syrup   40   Starch   1860s
Ingredient   Relative  Sweetness  Original  Source  Date of   Com-  mercialization  Notable Qualities  Trehalose   50   Honey,  mushrooms,  yeasts  2000s?  Sugar alcohols:  Lactitol   40   Lactose,  modified  1980s  Isomalt (Palatinit)   50   Sucrose,  modified  1980s   Less prone than sugar  to crystallize or  absorb moisture  Sorbitol   60   Fruits   1980s   Cooling; absorbs  moisture  Erythritol   70   Fruits,  fermentation  2000s?  Mannitol   70   Mushrooms,  algae  1980s   Cooling  Maltitol   90   Maltose,  modified  1980s  Xylitol   100   Fruits,  vegetables  1960s   Especially cooling  Tagatose   90   Heated milk   2000s?  Sucrose   100   Sugar cane &  beet  Traditional  High-fructose  corn syrup  100   Starch   1970s  Fructose crystals   120–170   Fruits, honey   1970s  Cyclamate   3,000   Synthetic   1950s   Banned in U.S.,  allowed in Europe  Glycyrrhizin   5,000–  10,000  Licorice root   Traditional  Aspartame   18,000   Amino acids  (modified)  1970s   Not stable at cooking  temperatures
Ingredient   Relative  Sweetness  Original  Source  Date of   Com-  mercialization  Notable Qualities  Acesulfame K   20,000   Synthetic   1980s   Stable at cooking  temperatures  Saccharin   30,000   Synthetic   1880s   Stable at cooking  temperatures  Stevioside   30,000   South  American  plant  1970s  Sucralose   60,000   Sucrose +  chlorine  1990s   Stable at cooking  temperatures  Neohesperidin  dihydrochalcone  180,000   Citrus fruits  (modified)  1990s  Alitame   200,000   Amino acids  (modified)  1990s  Thaumatin   200,000–  300,000  African plant   1980s  Neotame   800,000   Aspartame  (modified)  2000s?  Bulking Ingredients: Sugar Alcohols   The most common ingredients that provide  sugar-like bulk are the sugar alcohols, or polyols — chemicals whose names end in  -itol   — which are essentially sugars with one corner of their molecule modified (for  example, sorbitol is derived in this way from glucose). Small amounts of some  sugar alcohols — sorbitol, mannitol — are found in many fruits and plant parts.  Because the human body is designed to make use of sugars, not sugar alcohols, we  absorb only a fraction of these molecules from food, and use that fraction  inefficiently: so they cause only a slow rise in blood insulin levels. The rest are  metabolized by the microbes in our intestines, and we obtain their energy  indirectly. All told, sugar alcohols provide 50–75% of the caloric value of sugar.  Sugar alcohols don’t have the chemical structure (aldehyde group) that initiates  the browning reactions with each other and with amino acids, so they have the  sometimes useful property of being resistant to discoloration and flavor changes  when heated to make confections.
Intensive Sweeteners   Though most of the intensive sweeteners that we consume  today were synthesized in industrial laboratories, a number of them occur in  nature and have been enjoyed for centuries. Glycyrrhizin or glycyrrhizic acid, a  compound found in licorice root, is 50–100 times sweeter than sucrose, and is the  reason that licorice was first made into a sweet by extracting the root in hot water,  then boiling down the extract. The sweetness of the extract builds slowly in the  mouth and lingers. And the leaves of a South American plant commonly known as  stevia,   Stevia rebaudiana,   have been used for centuries in its homeland to sweeten  maté tea. Its active ingredient, stevioside, is available in a purified powdered form.  Neither it nor the plant has been approved by the U.S. FDA as a food additive, so  they’re sold as dietary supplements.  Intensive sweeteners often have some flavor qualities that make them imperfect  replacements for table sugar. For example, saccharin has a metallic aftertaste and  can seem bitter; stevioside has a woody after-taste. Many are slower than table  sugar to trigger the sensation of sweetness, and their taste persists longer after  swallowing. The relative sweetness of these sweeteners actually goes down as  their   individual   concentration   goes   up,   while   combining   them   produces   a  synergistic effect. So manufacturers often use two or more to minimize their odd  qualities and maximize their taste intensity.  Aspartame, a synthetic combination of two amino acids, is the most widely used  noncaloric sweetener. It is 180–200 times sweeter than table sugar, so that though  it carries the same number of calories in a given weight, much smaller amounts are  needed. Aspartame’s disadvantage is that it is broken down by heat and by acidity  and therefore can’t be used in cooked preparations.  Sweetness Inhibitors   Not only are there artificial sweeteners: there are also  substances that block us from experiencing the sweetness of sugars. These taste  inhibitors are useful for reducing the sweetness of a preparation whose texture  depends on a high sugar concentration. Lactisole (tradename Cypha) is a phenolic  compound found in small quantities in roasted coffee, patented as a flavor  modifier in 1985, and used in confectionery and snacks. In very small amounts it  reduces the apparent sweetness of sugar by two-thirds.
Modern Licorice  Today licorice is seldom used as a sweetener. The root of the licorice plant is  extracted with ammonia to produce an ammonium salt of the sweet-tasting  glycyrrhizic acid. The extract is much more expensive than molasses (the  source of blackness in traditional licorice candies), sugar, gelatin, starch, and  other ingredients in licorice candy, so it’s used mainly as an aromatic flavoring.  Licorice is especially popular in Denmark, where it’s strangely combined in  candies with salt and with ammonia. Glycyrrhizin also has effects on the  hormone system that controls blood pressure and volume, and so in large  doses can cause high blood pressure and swelling.  Sugars and Syrups  Honey  Honey was the most important sweetener in Europe until the 16th century, when  cane sugar and its more neutral sweetness became more widely available.  Germany and the Slavic countries were leading producers in the meantime, and  honey wine or   mead   (from the Sanskrit word for “honey”) was a great favorite in  both central Europe and Scandinavia. Honey is now valued as an alternative to  sugar, a premade syrup with many distinctive flavors to offer.  Food Words:   Honey  Though we think of the essence of honey as sweetness, the English word  arises from its color.   Honey   comes from an Indo-European root meaning  “yellow.”   The Indo-Europeans of course enjoyed honey and had a name for it.  The modern descendants of that root,   melit-,   include   molasses, marmalade,  mellifluous,   and   mousse   (via the Latin   mulsus,   “honey-sweet”).
The Honeybee   While the New World certainly knew and enjoyed honey before the  arrival of European explorers, North America did not. The bees native to the New  World, species of the genera   Melipona   and   Trigona,   are exclusively tropical. They  also differ from the European honeybees in being stingless and in collecting fluids  not just from flowers, but also from fruits, resins, and even carrion and excrement  — sources that make for unhealthful honeys as well as rich and strange flavors.  European colonization brought a fundamental change to North America by  introducing, around 1625, the bee that produces practically all the honey in the  world today,   Apis mellifera.  Bees are social insects that have evolved along with nectar-producing flowering  plants. The two organisms help each other out: plants provide the insects with  food, and insects carry cross-fertilizing pollen from one flower to another. Honey is  the form in which flower nectar is stored in the hive. It appears from the fossil  record that bees have been around for some 50 million years, their social  organization   for   half   that   time.   Apis,   the   principal   honey-producing   genus,  originated in India.   Apis mellifera,   the honey bee proper, evolved in subtropical  Africa and now inhabits the whole of the Northern Hemisphere up to the Arctic  Circle.  The Advance of the Bee in North America  We’re lucky to have a near-contemporary description of the honey bee’s  movement across North America. In 1832, Washington Irving toured what is  now the Oklahoma region and published his observations in   A Tour on the  Prairies.   The ninth chapter describes a “Bee-hunt,” the practice of finding  honey in the wild by following bees back to their hive.  It is surprising in what countless swarms the bees have overspread the Far  West within but a moderate number of years. The Indians consider them the  harbinger of the white man, as the buffalo is of the red man; and say that, in  proportion as the bee advances, the Indian and buffalo retire. We are always  accustomed to associate the hum of the bee-hive with the farm-house and  flower-garden, and to consider those industrious little animals as connected  with the busy haunts of man, and I am told that the wild bee is seldom to be
met with at any great distance from the frontier. They have been the heralds  of civilization, steadfastly preceding it as it advanced from the Atlantic  borders, and some of the ancient settlers of the West pretend to give the very  year when the honeybee first crossed the Mississippi. The Indians with  surprise found the mouldering trees of their forests suddenly teeming with  ambrosial sweets, and nothing, I am told, can exceed the greedy relish with  which they banquet for the first time upon this unbought luxury of the  wilderness.  For those of us who buy our luxury in jars, this initial sense of wonder is worth  reimagining.  How Bees Make Honey  Nectar   The principal raw material of honey is the nectar collected from flowers,  which produce it in order to attract pollinating insects and birds. Secondary  sources include nectaries elsewhere on the plant and honeydew, the secretions of  a particular group of bugs. The chemical composition of nectar varies widely, but  its major ingredient by far is sugars. Some nectars are mostly sucrose, some are  evenly divided among sucrose, glucose, and fructose, and some (sage and tupelo)  are mostly fructose. A few nectars are harmless to bees but poisonous to humans,  and so generate toxic honeys. Honey from the Pontic region of eastern Turkey was  notorious in ancient Greece and Rome; a local species of rhododendron carries  “grayanotoxins,” which interfere with both lung and heart action.  The most important sources of nectar are the flowers of plants in the bean family,  especially clover, and in the lettuce family, a large group that includes the  sunflower, dandelion, and thistles. Though most honey is made from a mixture of  nectars   from   different   flowers,   some   300   different “monofloral” honeys   are  produced in the world, with citrus, chestnut, buckwheat, and lavender honeys  especially   valued   for   their   distinctive   tastes.   Some   honeys,   chestnut   and  buckwheat in particular, are much darker than others, thanks in part to the higher  protein content in their nectars, which reacts with the sugars to produce dark  pigments as well as a toasted aroma.  Gathering Nectar   The bee gathers nectar from a flower by inserting its long
proboscis down into the nectary. In the process, its hairy body picks up pollen from  the flower’s anthers. The nectar passes through the bee’s esophagus into the  honey sac, a storage tank that holds the nectar until the bee returns to the hive.  Certain glands secrete enzymes into the sac, and these work to break down starch  into smaller chains of sugars and sucrose into its constituent glucose and fructose  molecules.  A few remarkable figures are worth quoting. A strong hive contains one mature  queen, a few hundred male drones, and some 20,000 female workers. For every  pound of honey taken to market, eight pounds are used by the hive in its everyday  activities. The total flight path required for a bee to gather enough nectar for this  pound of surplus honey has been estimated at three orbits around the earth. The  average bee forages within one mile of the hive, makes up to 25 round trips each  day,   and   carries   a   load   of   around   0.002   of   an   ounce,   or   0.06   grams   —  approximately half its weight. With its light chassis, a bee would get about 7  million miles to a gallon (3 million km per liter) of honey. In a lifetime of gathering,  a bee contributes only a small fraction of an ounce of honey to the hive.  Sweet Ants  Among the more unusual sweeteners are the honey or honeypot ants  (species of   Melophorus, Camponotus, Myrmecocystus ) of Australia, Mexico, and  the American southwest. Their colonies include a caste of workers whose role  it is to store nectar and honeydew in their abdomens, which swell to the size  of a pea or grape and become translucent. Honey ants are enjoyed by  pinching off the abdomens and popping them directly into the mouth, or by  folding them into tortillas.  Transforming Nectar into Honey   In the hive, the bees concentrate the nectar to  the point that it will resist bacteria and molds and so keep until it is needed.  “House bees” pump the nectar in and out of themselves for 15 or 20 minutes,  repeatedly forming a thin droplet under their proboscises from which water can  evaporate, until the water content of the nectar has dropped to 50 or 40%. The  bees then deposit the concentrated nectar in a thin film on the honeycomb, which
is a waxy network of hexagonal cylinders about 0.20 inch/5 mm across, built up  from the secretions of the wax glands of young workers. Here, with workers  keeping the hive air in continuous motion by fanning their wings, the nectar loses  more moisture, until it’s less than 20% water. This process, known as “ripening,”  takes about three weeks. The bees then fill the honeycomb cells to capacity with  fully ripe honey and cap them with a layer of wax.  The ripening of honey involves both evaporation and the continuing work of bee  enzymes. One important enzyme converts the sucrose almost entirely to glucose  and fructose, because a mixture of single-unit sugars is more soluble in water than  the   equivalent   amount   of   its   parent   sucrose,   and   so   can   be   more   highly  concentrated without crystallizing. Another enzyme oxidizes some glucose to form  gluconic acid and peroxides. Gluconic acid lowers the honey’s pH to about 3.9 and  makes it less hospitable to microbes, and the peroxides also act as an antiseptic. In  addition to these and other enzyme activities, the various components of ripening  honey react with each other and cause gradual changes in color and flavor.  Hundreds of different substances have been identified in honey, including more  than 20 different sugars, savory amino acids, and a variety of antioxidant phenolic  compounds and enzymes.  Honeycomb, and the anatomy of the worker bee. Worker bees hold freshly gathered  nectar in the honey sac, together with enzymes from various glands, until they return  to the hive.  Processing Honey   Some honey is sold in its beeswax honeycomb, but producers  extract most of their honey from the comb and then treat it to extend its shelf life.  They remove the honeycomb from the hive and spin it in a centrifuge to separate  liquid honey from solid wax. They then generally heat the honey to around  155ºF/68ºC to destroy sugar-fermenting yeasts, strain it to remove pieces of wax
and debris, sometimes blend it with other honeys, and finally filter it under  pressure to remove pollen grains and very small air bubbles that would cloud the  liquid. The honey may be packaged as a liquid at this stage, or else crystallized to  form a spreadable paste, or “cream,” that doesn’t run and drip the way liquid honey  does. Though it seems solid, 85% of cream honey remains in its liquid form,  dispersed around the 15% that has solidified into tiny crystals of glucose.  Because all sugars become increasingly soluble as the temperature rises, cream  honey softens and begins to melt into liquid honey when it’s warmed above about  80ºF/26ºC. By the same token, liquid honey that has granulated during storage can  be reliquefied with gentle heat.  Storing Honey   Honey is one of our more stable foods, but unlike table sugar it can  spoil. This is because it contains some moisture and absorbs more from the air  whenever the relative humidity exceeds 60%. Sugar-tolerant yeasts can grow on  the honey and produce off-flavors. It’s therefore best to store honey in a moisture-  tight container.  Thanks to its high concentration of sugars and the presence of some amino acids  and proteins, honey is prone to undesirable, flavor-flattening browning reactions,  not just when heated, but also when stored for a long time at room temperature. If  you use honey infrequently, it’s best to keep it at temperatures below 50ºF/15ºC.  Liquid honey will slowly granulate in the refrigerator, and cream honey will get  somewhat coarser.  Honey Flavor   The most delightful quality of honeys is their flavors, which make  them into natural sauce-like condiments. All honeys share a sweet taste base that  is slightly tart and savory as well, and a complex aroma that has several different  elements: caramel, vanilla, fruity (esters), floral (aldehydes), buttery (diacetyl),  sweet-spicy (sotolon, p. 418). Then honeys made from single nectars add their own  distinctive notes. Buckwheat honey is malty (methylbutanal); chestnut honey  carries the distinct note of corn tortillas (aminoacetophenone, with both floral and  animal elements); citrus and lavender honeys are citrusy and herbal but share a  grapy note (methyl anthranilate); linden honey includes a mixture of mint, thyme,  oregano, and tarragon aromatics.
The Composition of a Typical Honey  % by weight  Water   17  Fructose   38  Glucose   31  Sucrose   1.5  Other disaccharides   7  Higher sugars   1.5  Acids   0.6  Minerals   0.2  Honey in Cooking   Unlike sugar, which is often a hidden ingredient in processed  foods, honey is a very visible sweetener; most of it is added to foods by individual  consumers. With its syrup-like viscosity, glossiness, and range of brown shades, it  makes an attractive topping for pastries and other foods. It is the characteristic  sweetener in such pastries as baklava and lebkuchen, such confections as nougat  and torrone, halvah and pasteli, and in such liqueurs as Benedictine, Drambuie,  and Irish Mist. Although honey wine, or mead, has all but disappeared, honey beer  is popular in Africa. Americans use honey in many baked goods for a variety of  reasons. It can be substituted for sugar — 1 measure of honey is considered the  sweetening equivalent of 1.25–1.5 measures of sugar, although the amount of  added liquid must be decreased because honey does contain some water. Because  it is more hygroscopic, or water attracting, than table sugar, honey will keep breads  and cakes moister than sugar will, losing water to the air more slowly, and even  absorbing it on humid days. Thanks to its antioxidant phenolic compounds, it  slows the development of stale flavors in baked goods and warmed-over flavors in  meats. Bakers can use its acidity to react with baking soda and leaven quickbreads.  And its reactive reducing sugars accelerate desirable browning reactions and the  development of flavor and color in the crusts of baked goods, in marinades and  glazes, and other preparations.  Honey and Health; Infant Botulism   Though honey has not been refined the way
table sugar is and is chemically complex, it is no wonder food. Its vitamin content is  negligible; bees get most of theirs from pollen. Its antibacterial properties, which  led early physicians to use it to dress wounds, are due largely to hydrogen  peroxide, one of the products of glucose-oxidizing enzyme and a substance well  known and long employed in medicine. And honey should not be fed to children  less than a year old. It often carries the seed-like dormant spores of the botulism  bacterium ( Clostridium botulinum ), which are able to germinate in immature  digestive systems. Infant botulism can cause difficulty in breathing and paralysis.  Tree Syrups and Sugars: Maple, Birch, Palm  When bees make honey, they perform two basic tasks: they remove a very dilute  solution of sugar from plants, and then evaporate off most of the water. What the  bees evolved to do instinctively and with their own muscles and enzymes, humans  have learned to do with the help of tools and fire. We make syrups and sugars by  extracting dilute juices from plants, and then boiling off most or all of the water. Of  the man-made sweets, tree syrups and sugars are most like honey in that they  retain nearly all the original contents of the sap, and are not refined to the extent  that cane and beet sugars are.  Maple Syrup and Sugar   Long before Europeans introduced the honeybee, the  natives of North America had developed their own delicious concentrated sweets.  Several Indian tribes, notably the Algonquins, Iroquois, and Ojibways, had well-  established myths about and terminologies for maple sugaring by the time that  European explorers encountered them. Thanks to a remarkable document, we  have some idea of how ingenious they were at extracting and concentrating the  tree sap (see box below). All they needed was a tomahawk to cut into the tree, a  wood chip to keep the wound open, sheets of elm bark for containers, and cold  nights to freeze the water into pure ice crystals that could then be removed from  the ever more concentrated sap.  Maple sugar was an important part of the native Americans’ diet, worked into bear  fat, or mixed with corn meal to make a light, compact provision for journeys. For  the colonists, maple sugar was cheaper and more available than the heavily taxed  cane sugar from the West Indies. Even after the Revolution, many Americans found  a moral reason for preferring maple sugar to cane; cane sugar was produced  largely with slave labor. Toward the end of the nineteenth century, cane and beet
sugar became so cheap that the demand for maple sugar declined steeply. Today  the production of maple syrup is a cottage industry concentrated in the eastern  Canadian provinces, especially Quebec, and in the American Northeast.  Maple Sugaring Without Metal or Fire  In 1755, a young colonist was captured and “adopted” by a small group of  natives in the region that is now Ohio. In 1799 he published his story in   An  Account of the Remarkable Occurrences in the Life and Travels of Col. James  Smith,   which includes several descriptions of how the Indians made maple  sugar. Here’s the most ingenious method.  We had no large kettles with us this year, and the squaws made the frost, in  some measure, supply the place of fire, in making sugar. Their large bark  vessels, for holding the stock-water, they made broad and shallow; and as the  weather is very cold here, it frequently freezes at night in sugar time; and the  ice they break and cast out of the vessels. I asked them if they were not  throwing away the sugar? they said no; it was water they were casting away,  sugar did not freeze and there was scarcely any in that ice…. I observed that  after several times freezing, the water that remained in the vessel, changed its  colour and became brown and very sweet.  The Sap Run   The maple family originated in China or Japan and numbers some  100 species throughout the Northern Hemisphere. Of the four North American  species good for sugaring, the hard or rock maple,   Acer saccharum,   produces sap of  greater quality and in greater quantity than the others, and accounts for most of  the syrup produced today. In the spring, sap is collected from the first major thaw  until the leaf buds burst, at which point the tree fluids begin to carry substances  that give the syrup a harsh flavor. The sap run is improved by four conditions: a  severe winter that freezes the roots, snow cover that keeps the roots cold in the  spring, extreme variations in temperatures from day to night, and good exposure  to the sun. The northeastern states and eastern Canadian provinces meet these  needs most consistently.  Sap does run in other trees in early spring, and some of them — birch, hickory, and
elm, for example — have been tapped for sugar. But maples produce more and  sweeter sap than any other tree, thanks to an intricate physical mechanism by  which the tree forces sugars from the previous growing season out of storage in  the trunk and into the outer, actively growing zone, the cambium.  Syrup Production   From colonial times to the 20th century, sugar producers  collected the sap by punching a small hole in the maple tree, inserting a wooden  or metal spout into the cambium, and hanging a bucket into which the sap  dripped. This picturesque collection method has mostly given way to systems of  plastic taps and tubing, which carry the sap from many trees to a central holding  tank. Over a six-week season, the taps remove around 10% of a tree’s sugar stores,  in an average of 5 to 15 gallons/20–60 liters per tree (some give as much as 80  gallons). It takes around 40 parts of sap to make 1 part syrup. The sap contains  around 3% sucrose at the beginning of the season, half that at the end; so late-  season sap must be boiled longer and is therefore darker and stronger-flavored.  Today, many producers use energy-efficient reverse osmosis devices to remove  about 75% of the sap water without heat, then boil the concentrated sap to  develop its flavor and obtain the desired sugar concentration. They aim for a  temperature around 7ºF/4ºC above the boiling point of water, the equivalent of a  syrup that’s around 65% sugars.  The   Flavors   of   Maple   Syrups   The   final   composition   of   maple   syrup   is  approximately 62% sucrose, 34% water, 3% glucose and fructose, and 0.5% malic  and other acids, and traces of amino acids. The characteristic flavor of the syrup  includes sweetness from the sugars, a slight tartness from the acids, and a range of  aroma notes, including vanilla from vanillin (a common wood by-product) and  various products of sugar caramelization and browning reactions between the  sugars and amino acids. The longer and hotter the syrup is boiled, the darker the  color and the heavier the taste. Maple syrups are graded according to color, flavor,  and sugar content, with grade A assigned to the lighter, more delicately flavored,  sometimes less concentrated syrups that are poured directly onto foods. Grades B  and C are stronger in caramel flavor and are more often used for cooking, for  example in baked goods and meat glazes. Because true maple syrup is expensive,  many supermarket syrups contain little or none, and are artificially flavored.  Maple Sugar   Maple sugar is made by concentrating the syrup’s sucrose to the  point that it will crystallize when the syrup cools. This point is marked by a boiling  temperature of 25–40ºF/14–25ºC above the boiling point of water, or 237–
250ºF/114–125ºC at sea level. Left to itself, the syrup will form coarse crystals thinly  coated with the remainder of the brown, flavorful syrup. Maple cream, a malleable  mixture of very fine crystals in a small amount of dispersed syrup, is made by  cooling the syrup very rapidly to about 70ºF/21ºC by immersing the pan in baths  of iced water, and then beating it continuously until it becomes very stiff. This mass  is then gently rewarmed until it becomes smooth and semisoft.  Birch Syrup   The inhabitants of far northern parts of the globe, including Alaska  and Scandinavia, have long made a sweet syrup from the sap of birch trees, various  species of   Betula   that are the dominant forest trees in northern latitudes. Birch sap  runs for two to three weeks in early spring. It is much more dilute than maple sap,  around 1% sugars, mainly an even mixture of glucose and fructose. It takes around  100 parts of sap to make 1 of syrup, both because there’s less sugar to begin with,  and because a mixture of glucose and fructose is thinner than the equivalent  amount of sucrose; producers therefore aim for a final sugar concentration of 70–  75%. Thanks to the different sugars and their reactions, the syrup is reddish brown  and has a more caramel-like flavor than maple syrup; the level of vanillin is lower,  too.  Palm Syrup and Sugar; Agave Syrup   Among sugar-giving trees, certain tropical  palms are by far the most generous. The Asian sugar palm   (Borassus flabellifer ) can  be tapped for up to half the year, and yields 15–25 quarts/liters per day of a sap  that may be 12% sucrose! Individual trees can give 10–80 pounds of raw sugar  every year. Coconut, date, sago, and oil palms are less productive, but still far more  so than maples and birches. The sap is collected either from the flowering stalks at  the top of the tree, or from taps in the trunk, and then is boiled down either to a  syrup called palm honey, or to a crystallized mass, which in India is known as   gur  (Hindi) or   jaggery (English, via Portuguese from the Sanskrit   sharkara ). These same  words are also used for unrefined cane sugars. Unrefined palm sugar has a  distinctive, winey aroma that contributes to the flavor of Indian, Thai, Burmese, and  other South Asian and African cuisines. Some palm sugar is refined to make more  neutral white sugar.  Agave syrup is produced from the sap of various species of agave, desert plants  native to the New World that are related to the cactus family. The sugars in agave  syrup are about 70% fructose and 20% glucose, so this syrup tastes sweeter than  most.
Table Sugar: Cane and Beet sugars and Syrups  The processing of cane and beet sugar is much more complicated than the  production of honey and maple and palm sugars, and for one basic reason. Bees  and tree tappers begin with an isolated plant fluid that contains little else besides  water and sugar. But the raw material for table sugar is the crushed whole stem of  the cane, or the whole root of the beet. Cane and beet juices include many  substances — proteins, complex carbohydrates, tannins, pigments — that not only  interfere with the sweet taste themselves, but decompose into even less palatable  chemicals at the high temperatures necessary for the concentration process. Cane  and beet sugar must therefore be separated from these impurities.  Preindustrial Sugar Refining   From the late Middle Ages until the 19th century,  when machinery changed nearly every sort of manufacturing, the treatment of  sugar followed the same basic procedure. There were four separate stages:  •   clarifying the cane juice  •   boiling it down into a thick syrup to concentrate and crystallize the sucrose  •   draining the impurity-laden syrup from the solid crystals  •   washing the remaining syrup from the crystals  The cane stalks were first crushed and pressed, and the resulting juice was cleared  of many organic impurities by heating it with lime and a substance such as egg  white or animal blood, which would coagulate and trap the coarse impurities in a  scum that could be skimmed off. The remaining liquid was then boiled down in a  series of shallow pans until it had lost nearly all of its water, and poured into cone-  shaped clay molds a foot or two long with a capacity of 5 to 30 lb/2–14 kg. There it  was cooled, stirred, and allowed to crystallize into “raw sugar,” a dense mass of  sucrose crystals coated with a thin layer of syrup containing other sugars, minerals,  and various dissolved impurities. The clay cones were left to stand inverted for a  few days, during which time the syrup film, or   molasses,   would run off through a  small hole in the tip. In the final phase, a fine wet clay was packed over the wide  end of the cone, and its moisture was allowed to percolate through the solid block  of sugar crystals for eight to ten days. This washing, which could be repeated  several times, would remove most of the remaining molasses, though the resulting  sugar was generally yellowish.
From Sugarloaf to Sugar Cube  Until the late 19th century, sugar was sold in the conical masses formed by  the draining molds. These masses were called   loaves : hence the name  “Sugarloaf” that has been given to various hills and mountains for their  supposed resemblance. In 1872, a onetime grocer’s assistant named Henry  Tate, who had worked his way to the top of a Liverpool sugar refinery, was  shown an invention that cut up sugarloaves into small pieces for household  use. Tate patented the device, went into production, and in a short time made  a fortune with “Tate’s Sugar Cube.” He became a philanthropist and built the  National Gallery of British Art, better known as the Tate Gallery, which he filled  with his own collection.  Modern Sugar Refining   Today, sugar is produced by somewhat different means.  Because most sugarcane has been grown in colonies or developing countries, and  sugar refining requires expensive machinery, cane sugar production came to be  divided into two stages: the crystallization of raw, unrefined sugar in factories near  the plantations; and refining into white sugar in industrial countries that are the  major consumers. Sugar beets, on the other hand, are a temperate crop, grown  mainly in Europe and North America, so they are processed all the way to refined  sugar in a single factory. Harvested sugarcane is very perishable and must be  processed immediately; sugar beets may be stored for weeks to months before  they are processed into sugar.  Sugar production requires two basic kinds of work: crushing the cane to collect the  juice, and then boiling off the juice’s water. The crushing is hard physical labor, and  the boiling requires large amounts of heat. In the Caribbean, these needs were  filled by slave labor and deforestation. Three 19th-century innovations helped  make sugar a less costly pleasure: the application of steam power to the crushing;  the vacuum pan, which boils the syrup at reduced pressure and so at a lower,  gentler temperature; and the multiple evaporator, which recycles the heat of one  evaporation stage to heat the next.
Making Sugar  Making cane sugar. The initial processing of sugar cane into raw sugar is  carried out in tropical and sub-tropical cane-growing countries; most of the  subsequent refining of raw sugar into white sugar in consuming countries.  Beet sugar is made in essentially the same way, except that most sugar beets  are grown in temperate industrialized countries and processed there, and  beet molasses and syrups are not palatable.
The initial clarification of cane and beet juice is now accomplished without eggs or  blood; heat and lime are generally used to coagulate and remove proteins and  other impurities. Rather than waiting for gravity to draw off molasses, refiners use  centrifuges, which spin the raw sugar as a salad spinner spins greens, forcing the  liquid off the crystals in minutes rather than weeks. The sucrose is whitened by the  technique of decolorization, in which granular carbon — a material like activated  charcoal that can absorb undesirable molecules on its large surface area — is  added to the centrifuged, redissolved sugar. After it absorbs the last remaining  impurities, the charcoal is filtered out. The final crystallization process is carefully  controlled to give individual sugar crystals of uniform size. Our table sugar is an  astonishingly pure 99.85% sucrose.  Impurities in White Sugar   It turns out that the tiny fraction of impurities in table  sugar can make a noticeable difference in its color and flavor. Make a concentrated  syrup from just water and sugar and it will have a yellow, sometimes hazy cast,  thanks to large carbohydrate and pigment molecules that either get trapped  between sucrose molecules as they crystallize, or remain stuck to the crystal  surface. Beet sugar in particular sometimes carries earthy, rancid off-odors. Where  sugarcane grows above the ground and is so perishable that it is processed  immediately after harvest, the beet grows underground and may be stored for  weeks or months between harvest and processing, during which time it can be  tainted by soil bacteria and molds that remain on its surface. In addition, beet  sugar sometimes carries traces of defensive chemicals called saponins, which  resemble soaps. These are known to cause the development of a scum in syrups,  and   may   also   be   responsible   for   the   poor   baking   performance   sometimes  attributed to beet sugar. (This reputation may be an undeserved legacy of the  early 20th century, when refining techniques weren’t as effective and the quality of  beet sugar often didn’t measure up to that of cane sugar.)  Kinds of White Sugar   White sugar comes in a number of different forms, which  differ mainly in the size of the crystals. They go by many different names. Ordinary  table sugar, used for general cooking and dissolving in drinks, is midsized. Coarser  crystals are mainly used for decorating baked goods and confections, and for that  reason are specially treated to produce a sparkling, crystal-clear appearance. They  are made from exceptionally pure batches of sucrose, with the least possible  residue of the impurities that give ordinary sugar solutions a yellowish look.  They’re even washed with alcohol to remove sucrose dust on their surfaces. When
a cook wants to make the whitest possible fondant, or the clearest possible syrup,  it’s best to use these coarse or “sanding” sugars.  At the finer end of the scale, there are a number of sugars with smaller particles  than table sugar. Extra-fine, baker’s special, and English caster sugars all offer more  crystalline surfaces that can introduce air into fat during the creaming stage of  making cakes (p. 556). “Powdered” sugars have been ground into even smaller  particles, some small enough that they offer no roughness to the tongue, and can  be made directly into very smooth icings, frostings, and fillings. Powdered sugars  contain around 3% starch by weight to absorb moisture and prevent caking, and  therefore have a slightly floury taste and feeling on the tongue.  Forms of White Sugar: Names and Dimensions  The lengths listed below are the approximate largest dimension of the whole or  powdered crystals. Our tongues sense particles larger than about 0.02 mm as gritty.  Large-grain sugars: 1–2 mm  Coarse  Sanding  Pearl  Standard granulated table sugar: 0.3–0.5 mm  Fine granulated sugars: 0.1–0.3 mm  Fruit  Baker’s special  Caster  Superfine, ultrafine  Powdered sugars: 0.01–0.1 mm  Confectioner’s  Powdered  Fondant  Icing
Brown Sugars   Brown sugars are sucrose crystals that are coated with a layer of  dark syrup from one or another stage of sugar refining, and therefore have a more  complex flavor than pure sucrose. There are several basic kinds of brown sugars.  Factory Brown Sugars   “Factory” brown sugars were originally produced during the  initial processing of the cane juice into unrefined sugar. These include   demerara,  turbinado,   and   muscovado   sugars. Demerara (named after a region in Guyana)  came from the first crystallization stage of light cane juice, and took the form of  sticky, large, yellow-gold crystals. Turbinado was raw sugar partly washed of its  molasses coat during the centrifugation, also yellow-gold and large but not as  sticky as demerara. Muscovado was the product of the final crystallization from the  dark mother liquor (p. 675); it was brown, small-grained, sticky, and strong-  flavored.  Refinery Brown Sugars   Today, these evocative names of factory sugars are often  applied to a different product, brown sugars produced at the refinery using raw  sugar as the starting material, not the cane juice. All ordinary brown sugar is also  made in this way. There are two ways to make refinery brown sugars: redissolving  the raw sugar in a syrup of some kind and then recrystallizing it, so that it retains  some of the syrup on its crystal surfaces; or refining the raw sugar all the way to  pure white sugar, and then coating or “painting” its surfaces with a thin film of  syrup or molasses.  The basic difference between factory and refinery brown sugars is that true factory  sugars retain more of the flavor of the original cane juice, including green, fresh,  and vegetable-ocean aromas (from hexanol, acetaldehyde, and dimethyl sulfide).  Both kinds have an important vinegar aroma (from acetic acid), as well as caramel  and buttery notes (the buttery one from diacetyl, indeed found in butter), and  salty and bitter tastes (from minerals). Refinery brown sugars also develop what’s  described as a licorice aroma from the long, slow heating of the syrups.  Whole Sugars   It’s still possible to taste what might be called whole sugar,  crystalline sugar still enveloped in the cooked cane juice from which it formed. This  is the sugar sold in Indian groceries as   jaggery   or   gur,   and in Latin American shops  as   piloncillo, papelon,   or   panela.   The flavor is highly variable, and ranges from mild  caramel to strong molasses.  Using Brown Sugars   Brown sugar is soft and clingy because its molasses film —  whose glucose and fructose are more hygroscopic than sucrose — contains a
significant amount of water. Of course, if brown sugar is left exposed to dry air, it  will lose its moisture through evaporation and become hard and lumpy. It can be  kept moist by storing it in an airtight container, and resoftened by closing it up  with a damp towel or piece of apple from which it can absorb moisture. Because  brown sugar tends to trap air pockets between groups of adhering crystals, it  should be packed down before its volume is measured.  The Compositions of White and Brown Sugars  “Soft” brown sugars retain a coating of the syrup from which they were  crystallized; “coated” sugars are white sugars that have had a thin film of  brown syrup added after they’ve been crystallized and washed.  Sugar   Sucrose  Glucose +  Fructose  Other  Organic  Material   Minerals   Water  White Sugar   99.85   0.05   0.02   0.03   0.05  Brown   Sugars  Soft   85–93   1.5–4.5   2–4.5   1–2   2–3.5  Coated   90–96   2–5   1–3   0.3–1   1–2.5  Molasses and Cane Syrups  Molasses   Molasses, which is called   treacle   in the United Kingdom, is generally  defined   as   the   syrup   left   over   in   cane   sugar   processing   after   the   readily  crystallizable sucrose has been removed from the boiled juice. (There is such a  thing as beet molasses, but it has a strong, unpleasant odor, and so is used to feed  animals and industrial fermentation microbes.) In order to extract as much sucrose  as possible from cane juices, crystallization is performed in several different steps,  each of which results in a different grade of molasses. “First” molasses is the  product of centrifuging off the raw sugar crystals, and still contains some sucrose.  It   is   then   mixed   with   some   uncrystallized   sugar   syrup,   recrystallized,   and  recentrifuged. The resulting “second” molasses is even more concentrated in
impurities than the first. Repeating this process once more yields “third,” or final, or  “blackstrap” molasses (from the Dutch   stroop   for “syrup”). The brown-black color of  final molasses is due to the extreme caramelization of the remaining sugars and to  chemical reactions induced by the high temperatures reached during the repeated  boilings. These reactions, together with the high concentration of minerals, give  final molasses a harsh flavor that makes it generally unfit for direct human  consumption, although it’s sometimes sold blended with corn syrup. A small  amount is also used in tobacco curing.  Food Words:   Molasses, Treacle  Molasses   comes from the late Latin word   mellaceus,   which meant “like honey.”  The English term   treacle   comes via the French   triacle   from the Latin   theriaca,  meaning antidotes against poison. Medieval pharmacists used sugar syrups  to compound their drugs, and came to refer to the syrups by a term for the  remedies. Today,   treacle   can mean both dark, strong molasses or the lighter,  more delicate refiner’s syrups.  Kinds of Molasses   First and second molasses have been used in foods for many  years, and for a long time were the only form of sugar available to slaves and the  poor of the rural South, usually bleached with sulfur dioxide and strongly sulfurous  to the taste. Today, most molasses available to consumers are actually blends of  molasses and syrups from various stages throughout the sugar-making process.  They range from mild to pungent and bitter, from golden brown to brown-black.  The   darker   the   molasses,   the   more   its   sugars   have   been   transformed   by  caramelization and browning reactions, and so the less sweet and more bitter it is.  Light molasses may be 35% sucrose and 35% invert sugars, and 2% minerals;  blackstrap molasses may be 35% sucrose, 20% invert sugars, and 10% minerals.  Molasses in Cooking   The flavor of cane molasses is complex, with woody and  green notes as well as sweet, caramel, buttery ones. Its complexity has made it a  popular background flavor in many foods; popcorn balls, gingerbread, licorice,  barbeque sauces, and baked beans are examples. Cane molasses is usually but  unpredictably acidic; its pH varies between 5 and neutral 7, so it can sometimes
react with baking soda and produce leavening carbon dioxide in baked goods.  Thanks to its invert sugars, it helps retain moisture in foods. And a variety of  components contribute to a general antioxidant capacity, which helps slow the  development of off-flavors.  Cane and Sorghum Syrups   Cane syrups may be produced directly from cane juice  at sugar factories, or from raw sugar at refineries. They generally contain a  combination of sucrose (25–30%) and invert sugars (50%), are golden to medium  brown in color, and have a mild flavor with caramel, butterscotch, and leafy  aromas. Louisiana cane syrups were traditionally made from whole cane juice,  concentrated and clarified. The same basic product, with about half of its sucrose  inverted by acid or enzymes, is now sometimes called “high-test molasses.” It has  been heated less, and so has a more aromatic, less bitter flavor than true molasses.  “Golden syrup” is a refinery syrup made from raw sugar, filtered through charcoal  to give it a characteristic light, crystal-clear appearance and delicate flavor. Cane  syrups offer more character (though also a more intense sweetness) than corn  syrup in such dishes as pecan pie.  Sorghum syrup is made in small quantities in the American South and Midwest  from the stalk juice of sweet sorghum, specialized varieties of a cereal plant  normally grown for its grain ( Sorghum bicolor,   p. 482). Sorghum syrup is mainly  sucrose, and has a distinctive pungency.  Fruit Syrups: Ancient Saba, Modern Fruit Sweeteners  In Europe, the original sweet syrups were made not from cane, but from  grapes. Italian   saba   is grape juice cooked down to a concentrated, viscous  syrup. It contains about equal amounts of glucose and fructose, and in  addition has a distinct tartness due to the simultaneous concentration of the  grape acids. In the 16th century, Nostradamus described making various  sweet preparations with saba, and noted that “in places where there is neither  sugar nor honey, the sovereign sun produces and nourishes other fruits  which…come to satisfy our sensuous desire….”  Manufactured fruit syrups are a relatively recent version of the traditional  syrups. They’re made from batches of various fruits, including apples, pears,
and grapes, that are in surplus, damaged, or otherwise not suitable for other  uses. Both aroma and color are removed from the juice, which is concentrated  to about 75% sugars, mainly glucose and fructose due to the action of the  fruit acids on sucrose. The acids are also concentrated, so the pH of the syrup  is around 4. Food manufacturers value these fruit syrups in part because they  can be identified appealingly as “fruit sweeteners” on the label, rather than as  sugar or corn syrup. They may also contain significant amounts of pectin and  other cell-wall carbohydrates that help stabilize emulsions and reduce crystal  size in frozen preparations.  Corn Syrups, Glucose and Fructose Syrups, Malt Syrup  Sugars from Starch   We come now to a source of sugar that is relatively new, but  today rivals cane and beet sugars in commercial importance. In 1811, a Russian  chemist, K. S. Kirchof, found that if he heated potato starch in the presence of  sulfuric acid, the starch was transformed into sweet crystals and a viscous syrup. A  few years later, he discovered that malted barley had the same effect as the acid  (and thereby laid the foundations for a scientific understanding of beer brewing).  We now know that starch consists of long chains of glucose molecules, and that  both acids and certain plant, animal, and microbial enzymes will break these long  chains down into smaller pieces and eventually into individual glucose molecules.  The sugars make the syrup sweet, and the remaining fragments of glucose chains  give the solution a thick, viscous consistency. In the United States, the acid  technique was used to produce syrup from potato starch in the 1840s, and from  corn starch beginning in the 1860s.  High-Fructose Corn Syrups   The 1960s brought the invention of fructose syrups.  These start out as plain corn or potato syrups, but an additional enzyme process  converts some of the glucose sugars into fructose, which is much sweeter and  therefore gives the syrups a higher sweetening power. The solids in standard high-  fructose corn syrup are around 53% glucose and 42% fructose, and provide the  same sweetness as the syrup’s equivalent weight in table sugar. Because high-  fructose syrups are relatively cheap, soft-drink manufacturers began to replace  cane and beet sugars with them in the 1980s, and Americans began to consume
more corn syrups than cane and beet sugar. Today they’re a very important  sweetener in food manufacturing.  Making Corn Syrups   To make corn syrups, manufacturers extract starch granules  from the kernels of common dent corn (p. 477), and then treat them with acid  and/or with microbial or malt enzymes to develop a sweet syrup that is then  clarified, decolorized, and evaporated to the desired concentration. Nowadays,  enzymes from the easily cultured molds   Aspergillus oryzae   (also used in Japan to  break rice starch down into fermentable sugars for   sake ) and   A. niger   are used  almost exclusively. In Europe, potato and wheat starch are the main sources for  making what is called “glucose” or “glucose syrup,” which is essentially the same as  American corn syrup.  Fructose Crystals  Crystalline fructose has been commercially available for only a few decades.  Fructose is so hygroscopic, or water-absorbing, that it’s hard to get it to  crystallize from a water solution. It’s now made by mixing high-fructose corn  syrup with alcohol, in which fructose is much less soluble. If fructose crystals  are sprinkled onto a food as decoration, they’ll quickly disappear into a thin,  sticky syrup as they absorb moisture from the food and air and dissolve.  The Properties and Uses of Corn Syrups   Among the usual sweeteners available  to the cook, corn syrups are alone in providing long carbohydrate molecules that  get tangled up with each other and slow down the motion of all molecules in the  syrup, thus giving it a thicker consistency than any but the most concentrated  sucrose syrups. It’s largely these long tangly molecules that have made corn syrup  increasingly important in confectionery and other prepared foods. Because the  tangling interferes with molecular motion, it also has the valuable effect of  preventing other sugars in candy from crystallizing and producing a grainy texture.  All molecules in the syrup are flowing very slowly, and the sucrose crystal faces  keep getting covered with chains that can’t become part of the crystal. (The same  behavior helps minimize the size of ice crystals in ice cream and fruit ices, thus  encouraging a smooth, creamy consistency.) Another consequence of corn syrup’s
viscosity is that it imparts a thick, chewy texture to foods. And because it includes  glucose, a water-binding sugar that is less sweet than table sugar, corn syrup helps  prevent moisture loss and prolongs the storage life of various foods without the  cloying sweetness that honey or sucrose syrup imparts. Finally, all corn syrups are  somewhat acid, with a pH between 3.5 and 5.5, so in baked goods they can react  with baking soda to produce carbon dioxide and thus contribute to leavening.  Corn syrups. Standard corn syrup is a water solution of glucose chains of varying  lengths (left). One-and two-unit sugars taste sweet, while taste-free longer chains  make the syrup viscous. By controlling the relative populations of different chains, the  manufacturer can tailor the syrup’s balance of sweetening and thickening powers.  High-fructose corn syrup (right) has been treated with an enzyme to convert a portion  of the single glucose molecules (small hexagons) into fructose molecules (small  pentagons), which taste sweeter.  Grades of Corn Syrup   Corn syrup is an especially versatile ingredient in food  manufacturing because its sweetness and viscosity can be varied simply by  controlling the thoroughness of the enzymatic digestion of starch into sugars. The  most common consumer grade of corn syrup is about 20% water, 14% glucose,  11% maltose, and 55% longer glucose chains. It is only moderately sweet, and  fairly viscous. Several others grades are available to manufacturers:  •   Maltodextrins are syrups that contain less than 20% glucose plus maltose,  and are used mainly to give viscosity and body with little sweetness and  moisture absorption.  •   High-fructose corn syrups are around 75% fructose plus glucose, and give an  overall sweetness around that of table sugar. They and high-glucose syrups  help develop color and retain moisture in baked goods.
•   High-maltose syrups are valuable in ice creams, and some confections,  where lowered freezing points or interference with crystallization are desired  but sweetness is not; maltose is less sweet than either table sugar or glucose.  In baked goods, maltose feeds yeasts and improves leavening.  Malt Syrup and Extract   Malt syrup is made from a combination of germinated  cereal grains, preeminently barley, and ordinary cooked grains. It’s among the  most ancient and versatile of sweetening agents, and was the predecessor of  modern-day high-tech corn syrups. Along with honey, malt syrup was the primary  sweetener in China for 2,000 years, until around 1000   CE ; it’s still made in both  China and Korea. Malt syrup had the advantage that it could be made in  households from readily available and easily stored materials, the same whole  grains that were grown as staple foods, including wheat, rice, and sorghum. It was  therefore a far more affordable sweetener than cane sugar.  There are three stages to making malt syrup. First a portion of whole grain is  malted : soaked in water and allowed to germinate partly, then dried again by  means of carefully controlled heating (p. 744). The germinating embryo produces  enzymes that will digest the grain’s starch into sugars to fuel its growth; barley is  preferred in malting because it produces unusually copious and active enzymes.  Drying preserves these enzymes, and also develops color and flavor by means of  browning reactions. In the second stage, the malted grain is mixed with some  water and with unmalted but cooked grains — rice, wheat, barley — and the malt  enzymes digest the cooked starch granules to produce a sweet slurry. In the final  stage, the slurry is extracted with additional water, and the liquid is boiled down to  concentrate it. The result is a concentrated syrup of maltose, glucose, and some  longer glucose chains. Malt syrup is therefore much less sweet than a similarly  viscous sucrose syrup. In Asia it is used to provide color and gloss in savory dishes  — for example, it’s painted onto the skin of Peking duck — as well as in  confections.  Malt syrup has a relatively mild malt aroma because the malted barley is a small  fraction of the grain mixture. If the malted barley is soaked on its own, without any  added cooked grains, then the malt flavor is much stronger. Such a preparation is  usually called “malt extract.” It is frequently used in baking to provide maltose and  glucose for yeast growth and moisture retention (p. 530). In the United States,  malted milk and malt balls are made from a mixture of barley malt and powdered  milk.
The Composition of Malt Extract  % of Malt Extract by Weight  Water   20%  Protein   5  Minerals   1  Total sugars   60  Glucose   7–10  Maltose (double-glucose chains)   40  Maltotriose (triple-glucose chains)   10–15  Longer glucose chains   25–30  Sugar Candies and Confectionery  All sugar candies, whether brittle or creamy or chewy, are essentially mixtures of  two ingredients: sugar and water. Cooks manage to create very different textures  from the same materials by varying the relative proportions of sugar and water,  and   the   physical   arrangement   of   the   sugar   molecules.   They   control   the  proportions   as   they   cook   the   sugar   syrup,   and   they   control   the   physical  arrangement as they cool it. Depending on how hot the syrup gets, how quickly it  cools, and how much it’s stirred, it can solidify into coarse sugar crystals, fine sugar  crystals, or a monolithic crystal-free mass. To a large extent, the art of the  confectioner depends on the science of crystallization.  Setting the Sugar Concentration: Cooking the Syrup  The first factor that influences candy texture is the concentration of sugar in the  cooked syrup. Confectioners have found from long experience that certain syrup  concentrations are best for making certain kinds of candy. Generally, the more  water the syrup contains, the softer the final product will be. So the cook must
know how to make and recognize particular syrup concentrations. This turns out to  be pretty simple. When we dissolve sugar or salt in water, the boiling point of the  solution becomes higher than the boiling point of pure water (see p. 785). This  increase in the boiling point depends predictably on the amount of material  dissolved: the more dissolved molecules in the water, the higher the boiling point.  So the boiling point of a solution is an indicator of the concentration of the  dissolved material. The graph in the box below shows, for example, that a sugar  syrup that boils at 250ºF/125ºC is about 90% sugar by weight.  Frostings, Icings, and Glazes  Frostings, icings, and glazes are sweet coatings for cakes and other baked  goods. In addition to being tasty and decorative, they protect the food  underneath from drying out. These preparations began in the 17th century as  plain syrup glazes, and gradually evolved into more elaborate forms. Today,  glazes are glossy, thin, dense coatings made with a combination of powdered  sugar, a small amount of water, corn syrup, and sometimes fat (butter, cream).  The corn syrup and fat prevent the sugar from forming coarse crystals, and  the corn syrup provides a moisture-attracting liquid phase to fill the space  between sugar particles and create a smooth, glass-like surface. A warm  fondant (around 100ºF/38ºC) poured over the cake or pastry produces a  similar effect. Simple frostings are made by whipping sugar and air into a  solid fat — butter, cream cheese, or vegetable shortening — to make a sweet,  creamy, light mass. The sugar particles must be small enough not to make the  frosting seem grainy, so fine grades of powdered sugar are the usual choice.  Cooked frostings and icings include eggs or flour and owe their body in part  to the egg proteins or flour starch. Because the sugar dissolves during the  cooking, its particle size is unimportant.  Cooking the Syrup Raises the Sugar Concentration   As a sugar solution boils,  water molecules evaporate from the liquid phase into the air, while the sugar  molecules stay behind. The sugar molecules therefore account for a larger and  larger proportion of all the molecules in the solution. So as it boils, the syrup gets  more and more concentrated: and this in turn causes its boiling point to continue
to rise. In order to make a syrup of a given sugar concentration, all the candy maker  has to do is heat a mixture of sugar and water until it boils, and then keep it at the  boil and watch its temperature. At 235ºF/113ºC, or about 85% sugar, the cook can  stop the concentration process and make fudge; at 270ºF/132ºC, or 90%, taffy; at  300ºF/149ºC and above, nearing 100% sugar, brittles and hard candies.  Confections and the Sugar Syrups They’re Made from  Sugar confections are made from syrups with particular sugar concentrations.  This chart lists some common confections and two distinguishing qualities of  their syrups.  Syrup Behavior in  Cold-Water Test   Syrup Boiling Point* ºF/ºC   Confection  Thread   215–235/102–113   Syrups, preserves  Soft ball   235–240/113–116   Fondant, fudge  Firm ball   245–250/118–121   Caramel candies  Hard ball   240–265/121–130   Marshmallows, nougat  Soft crack   270–290/132–143   Taffy  Hard crack   300–310/149–154   Butterscotch, brittle  320–335/160–168   Hard candies, toffee  340/170   Light caramel for syrups,  color, and flavor  355–360/180–182   Spun sugar, sugar cages;  medium caramel  375–380/188–190   Dark caramel  410/205   Black caramel  *Above 330ºF/165ºC, the sugar syrup is more than 99% sucrose. It no longer  boils, but begins to break down and caramelize. Boiling points depend on  elevation. For each 1,000 feet/305 meters above sea level, subtract 2ºF/1ºC  from every boiling point listed.
The Cold-Water Test   Although it was invented 400 years ago by Sanctorius, the  thermometer has been a common household appliance for only a few decades.  Beginning in the 16th century and continuing to this day, confectioners have used  a more direct means of sampling the syrup’s fitness for different candies: they  scoop out a small amount, cool it quickly, and note its behavior. Thin syrups will  simply form a thread in the air. Somewhat more concentrated syrups form a ball  when dropped into cold water, and the ball will be soft and malleable between the  Syrup Boiling Points Depend on Sugar Concentration  The boiling point of a sugar solution increases as the concentration of sugar  increases. This graph shows the relationship between boiling point and sugar  concentration at sea level.  fingers; as the concentration increases, the cooled ball becomes harder. The most  concentrated syrups make a cracking sound as they turn into hard, brittle threads.  Each of these stages indicates a particular temperature range and suitability for a  particular kind of candy (see box   above ).  The Heating Rate Accelerates During Cooking   As we cook a sugar syrup, most of  the heat goes into the work of evaporating water molecules from the syrup, and  less into actually raising the temperature of the syrup; so the syrup temperature  rises only gradually. But as the sugar concentration passes 80%, there’s so little
water left that both the temperature of the syrup and its boiling point rise more  rapidly. As the concentration approaches 100%, the temperature rises very fast,  and can easily overshoot the desired range and brown or scorch the sugar. To  avoid this, the cook should reduce the heat toward the end of cooking and keep a  careful eye on the syrup temperature.  Setting the Sugar Structure: Cooling and Crystallization  The final texture of a candy is determined by the way in which the sugar molecules  in the cooked syrup cool and settle into a solid structure. If the sugar forms a few  large crystals, then the candy texture will be coarse and grainy. If it forms many  millions of microscopic crystals that are lubricated by just the right amount of  syrup, then the candy will be smooth and creamy. And if it forms no crystals at all,  then it will be a hard, monolithic mass. The trickiest stage of candy making thus  comes   after   the cooking, when the syrup cools from 250–350ºF/ 120–175ºC down  to room temperature. The rate of cooling, the movement of the syrup, and the  presence of the smallest particles of dust or sugar can have drastic effects on the  candy’s structure and texture.  How Sugar Crystals Form   Sugar molecules have a natural tendency to bond to  each other in orderly arrays and form dense solid masses, or crystals. When sugar  crystals are dissolved in water to make a syrup, the water molecules overcome that  tendency by forming their own bonds with the sugar molecules, surrounding and  separating them from each other. If the dissolved sugar molecules in a syrup get  too crowded for the water molecules to keep the sugars apart from each other, the  sugars will begin to bond to each other again and form crystals. When the  tendency of a dissolved substance to bond to itself is exactly balanced by the  water’s ability to prevent this bonding, the solution is called   saturated.  The   saturation   point   depends   on   temperature.   The   rapidly   moving   water  molecules in a hot sugar solution can keep more sugar molecules dissolved than  the sluggish water molecules in a cold solution can. The moment that a hot and  saturated solution begins to cool, it becomes   super   saturated. That is, it temporarily  contains more dissolved sugar than it normally could at that temperature. And  once the solution has become supersaturated, the smallest disturbance will induce  sugar crystals to form and grow. As the sugar molecules gather into solid crystals,  they leave the solution around them less concentrated. When the solution reaches
the sugar concentration appropriate for its new temperature, the sugar crystals  stop forming and growing. The sugar is now in two different states: some remains  dissolved in the syrup, and some is packed in the solid crystals surrounded by the  syrup.  There are two steps in sugar crystallization: the formation of crystal “seeds,” and the  growth of those seeds into mature, full-sized crystals. Seed formation determines  how many crystals will form, and crystal growth determines how large they get.  Both steps affect the final texture of a candy.  The growth of sugar crystals as a hot syrup cools. Left: Crystals are tightly organized,  solid clusters of molecules. Center: When conditions favor the formation of crystal  seeds, the dissolved sugar molecules can join many seeds, the resulting crystals are  small, and the candy texture is fine. Right: When conditions limit the formation of  crystal seeds, the dissolved sugar molecules can join only a few seeds, the resulting  crystals are large, and the candy texture is coarse.  Particles, Temperature, and Stirring Influence Crystallization   The crystal “seed”  is   an   initial   surface   to   which   sugar   molecules   can   attach   themselves   and  accumulate in a solid mass. The seed can be a few sugar molecules that happen to  come together during random movements in the syrup. Stirring and agitation  have the effect of bumping solution molecules together more often than they  otherwise would, and thereby encourage the formation of crystal seeds. Other  things can also serve as seeds in a cooling syrup and initiate crystallization. Among
the more common are the tiny crystals that form when the syrup spatters on the  side of the pan or dries off on a spoon, and that then are stirred back into the  syrup. Dust particles and even tiny air bubbles can also act as crystal seeds. A metal  spoon can induce crystallization by conducting heat away from local areas of the  syrup, cooling them and so leaving them super-supersaturated. Experienced candy  makers therefore prevent premature crystallization by using wooden spoons,  avoiding agitation of the syrup once it’s cooked and begins to cool, and carefully  removing dried syrup spatter from the pan walls with a moist brush.  Controlling Crystal Size and Candy Texture   The cook has to worry about  premature   crystallization   because   candy   texture   is   affected   by   the   syrup  temperature at which crystallization begins. Generally, hot syrups produce coarse  crystals, and cool syrups produce fine crystals. Here’s the logic. Because more sugar  molecules will arrive at the crystal surface during a given time in a hot syrup with  fast-moving molecules than in a cold, lethargic one, crystals grow more rapidly in  hot syrups. At the same time, because stable crystal   seeds   are   less   likely to form at  higher temperatures — an aggregate of a few sugar molecules is more easily  knocked apart in fast-moving surroundings — the total number of crystals formed  in a hot syrup will be lower. Put these two trends together, and we see that when a  hot syrup begins to crystallize, it will produce fewer and larger crystals than a cool  one, and therefore a coarse texture. This is why recipes for fudge or fondant,  candies with a fine, creamy texture, call for the syrup to be cooled drastically —  from 235ºF/113ºC down to around 110ºF/43ºC — before the cook initiates  crystallization by stirring.  Stirring Makes Smaller Crystals   Crystal size and texture are also influenced by  stirring. We’ve seen that agitation favors the formation of crystal seeds by pushing  sugar molecules into each other. A syrup that is stirred infrequently will develop  only a few crystals, while one that is kept in motion continuously will produce  great numbers. And the more crystals there are in a syrup, all competing for the  remaining free molecules, the fewer free molecules there are to go around, and so  the smaller the average size of each crystal. The more a syrup is stirred, then, the  finer the consistency of the final candy. This is the justification for wearing your  arm out when making fudge: the moment you let up, the formation of seeds slows  down, the crystals you’ve made up to that point begin to grow in size, and the  candy gets coarse and grainy.
Rules for Creating Fine-Textured Candies  In order to produce many small sugar crystals from a syrup, the candy maker  should  •   include some corn syrup in the recipe to interfere with crystal formation  •   remove dried syrup from the pan interior before cooling the syrup  •   allow the syrup to cool before initiating crystallization  •   avoid agitating the syrup while it cools  •   when the syrup is cool, agitate continuously and vigorously for as long  as the syrup is workable  Preventing Crystal Formation: Making Sugar into a Glass   Candy makers  produce an entirely different structure and texture when they cool a syrup so  rapidly that the sugar molecules stop moving before they have a chance to form  any crystals at all. This is how transparent hard candies are made. If the water  content of the cooked syrup is just 1 or 2%, then it’s essentially molten sugar with a  trace of water dispersed in it. The syrup is very viscous, and if it cools quickly, the  sucrose molecules never have a chance to settle into orderly crystals. Instead, they  just set in place in a disorganized mass. Such an amorphous, noncrystalline  material is called a   glass.   Ordinary window and table glass is a noncrystalline  version of silicon dioxide. Like this mineral glass, sugar glass is brittle and  transparent (and often stands in for its harder and more dangerous cousin in the  movies and on stage!). Glasses are transparent because individual sugar molecules  are too small to deflect light when they’re randomly arranged. Crystalline solids  appear opaque because even tiny crystals are solid masses of many molecules, and  their surfaces are big enough to deflect light.
Crystalline and glassy candies. Left: When a hot syrup cools slowly enough for the  molecules to cluster together, they form tightly organized crystals. Right: When a very  concentrated syrup cools quickly and traps the sugar molecules in place before they  can cluster, they solidify into a disorganized, noncrystalline glass.  Limiting Crystal Growth with Interfering Agents   In practice, it’s not easy to  control or prevent the crystallization of pure sucrose syrups, and candy makers  have long relied on other ingredients that interfere with and therefore limit crystal  formation and growth. These interfering agents help the cook prepare clear  noncrystalline hard candies and fine-textured creams, fudges, and other soft  candies.  Invert Sugar   The original interfering agents were glucose and fructose, or “invert  sugar” (p. 655). When heated along with a small amount of acid (often cream of  tartar), sucrose is broken down into its two components, glucose and fructose.  Glucose and fructose interfere with sucrose crystallization by bonding temporarily  to the crystal surface and blocking the way of sucrose molecules. Honey is a  natural source of invert sugar, and “invert syrup” is an artificial preparation of a  glucose-fructose mixture. Thanks to their fructose content, both honey and invert  syrup readily caramelize and can cause undesirable browning in some sweets.  Acid-inverted syrups brown less because their acidity slows caramelization.  Corn Syrup   Because acid treatment of sucrose is somewhat unpredictable, most  modern confectioners instead use corn syrup, which is an especially effective  inhibitor of crystallization, and doesn’t readily caramelize. The assorted long
glucose chains form a tangle that impedes the motion of both sugar and water  molecules and makes it more difficult for the sucrose to find a crystal onto which  to fit. The glucose and maltose molecules interfere in the same way that invert  sugar does. Corn syrup also provides body and chewiness, is less sweet than  sugars, and has the advantage for manufacturers of being less expensive than  crystalline sugar.  Other Candy Ingredients   Confectioners add a number of other ingredients to the  basic sugar syrup for candies to modify taste and texture. All interfere with sucrose  crystallization to some extent and so tend to encourage finer crystals.  Milk Proteins and Fat   Milk proteins thicken candy body and, because they brown  easily, add a rich flavor to caramels and fudge. The casein proteins contribute to a  chewy body, whey proteins to browning and flavor development, and both help  emulsify   and   stabilize   butterfat   droplets.   Butterfat   lends   smoothness   and  moistness to butterscotch, caramel, toffee, and fudge, and reduces the tendency of  chewy   candies   to   stick   to   the   teeth.   Because   milk   proteins   curdle   in   acid  conditions, and caramelization and browning reactions generate acids, candies  that include milk solids are sometimes neutralized with baking soda. The reaction  between acids and baking soda generates bubbles of carbon dioxide, so such  candies may be filled with small bubbles that give them a more fragile texture, less  chewy or hard or clinging.  Gelling Agents   Confectioners also give a firmer body to certain candies with a  number of ingredients that bond to each other and to water to form solid but  moist gels. These ingredients include gelatin, egg white, grain starches and flours,  pectin, and plant gums. Gelatin and pectin in particular are used to make gummy  and jelly candies, often in combination. Gelatin provides a tough chewiness, while  pectin makes a more tender gel. Gum tragacanth, a carbohydrate from a West  Asian shrub in the bean family ( Astragalus ), has been used for centuries to make  the sugar dough from which lozenges are cut and dried.  Acids   Many candies include an acid ingredient to balance the overwhelming  sweetness. Jelly beans, for example, have a tart surface. These flavoring acids are  added after the syrup has cooled down, so as to avoid excessive inversion of the  sucrose into glucose and fructose. Different acids are said to have different taste  profiles. Citric and tartaric acids give a rapid impression of acidity, while malic,  lactic, and fumaric acids are slower to register on the tongue.
Kinds of Candies  It’s convenient to divide sugar confections into three groups: noncrystalline  candies, crystalline candies, and candies whose texture is modified with gums,  gels, and pastes. In practice these groups overlap: there are crystalline and  noncrystalline versions of caramels, hard candies, nougat, sugar work, and so on.  Here are brief descriptions of the principal candies made today.  Candy Colors  Many candies are intensely colored to strike the eye as strongly as the taste  buds. The pigments in such candies are generally synthesized from petroleum  by-products, and are much more intense and stable than natural colorings.  Iridescent effects are produced with a combination of thin plates of mica  (potassium aluminum silicate) and either titanium dioxide or ferric oxide  (mineral pigments).  Noncrystalline Candies: Hard Candies, Brittles, Caramel and Taffy, Sugar Work  Hard Candies   Hard candies are the simplest noncrystalline candies; they include  hard drops, clear mints, butterscotch, bonbons, lollipops, and so on. Hard candy is  made by boiling the syrup high enough that the final solid will contain only 1 or  2% moisture, then pouring the syrup onto a surface and cooling it down, kneading  in colors and flavors while it’s still malleable, and shaping it. The very high sugar  concentration makes this syrup liable to form crystals at the slightest excuse, so a  substantial proportion of corn syrup is used to prevent this and produce a clear  sugar glass. The high cooking temperatures also encourage caramelization and a  yellow-brown discoloration, which are not desirable in these candies; they’re often  manufactured under reduced pressure, which allows them to reach the proper  sugar concentration at a lower temperature.
The Composition of Some Popular Candies  The more sugars and the less water a candy contains, the harder its texture.  Glucose sugars and chains (corn syrup) are included in candy syrups to prevent  sucrose crystallization (hard candies, gummy candies) or to limit it (caramels,  fudge, fondant).  Intentionally Crystalline Hard Candies   The development of crystals is considered  a defect in many hard candies, and results from too little interfering corn syrup, or  the introduction of seed crystals from the pan sides, or too much moisture in the  syrup. But some hard candies are intentionally manipulated to form tiny crystals,  which give the candy a “short,” more crumbly texture. Candy canes and after-  dinner mints are common examples of such confections. An opaque but satin-or  silk-like sheen results when the cooled but malleable syrup is repeatedly pulled  and folded back onto itself. This working incorporates some air bubbles, and these  in turn encourage the formation of tiny sucrose crystals. Both bubbles and crystals  interrupt the candy structure, giving it a crisp, light quality and making it easier to  break between the teeth. (See “Sugar Work” below.)  Cotton Candy   Cotton candy or candy floss is a very different kind of hard candy,  filaments of sugar glass so fine that they have the consistency of a cotton ball and  dissolve away the moment they touch the moist mouth. Cotton candy is made in a  special machine that melts the sugar and forces it through tiny spinnerets into the
air, where it instantly solidifies into threads. It was introduced at the 1904 World’s  Fair in St. Louis.  Brittles   Brittles are also cooked to a very low moisture content, around 2%, but  unlike the other hard candies, they include butter and milk solids, and usually  pieces of nuts. They’re thus opaque with fat droplets and protein particles, and  brown in color thanks to extensive browning reactions between sugars and  proteins. Baking soda is often added to brittle syrups after they’re cooked, for  several reasons: alkaline conditions favor browning reactions, help neutralize some  of the acids produced thereby, and the bubbles of carbon dioxide that result from  this neutralization become trapped in the candy, giving it a lighter texture. The  original French   praline   was a brittle made with almonds. (The modern New Orleans  praline is soft and chewy, more like a caramel, and contains New-World pecans  instead of almonds.)  Caramels,   Toffees,   and   Taffies   Caramels   and   their   relatives   are   generally  noncrystalline   candies   that   contain   milkfat   and   milk   solids,   usually   in   the  concentrated form of sweetened condensed milk. (Cheap versions are made with  milk powder and vegetable shortening.) They are chewy rather than hard, and  wonderfully mouthwatering because chewing liberates droplets of butterfat from  the sugar mass. Their chewiness comes from a lower cooking temperature and so a  higher moisture content than hard candies, a large proportion of corn syrup, and  the presence of milk casein proteins. The characteristic caramel flavor develops  from the milk ingredients and reactions between these and the syrup sugars  during the cooking. In Britain, butter for toffee was often stored to develop some  rancidity (from free butyric acid), which produced a desirably stronger dairy flavor  in the finished candy. (American chocolate manufacturers have done much the  same thing; see box, p. 703). The higher the fat content, the less these candies stick  to the teeth.  Caramels are cooked to the lowest temperature of the noncrystalline candies, have  the highest moisture content, and are the softest. Toffees and taffies contain less  butter and milk solids — taffies sometimes none at all — and are cooked 50ºF  hotter than caramels, so they’re more firm. Taffies are often pulled to produce an  aerated, finely crystalline, less dense, less chewy version. Caramels made with dairy  products owe some of their flavor to caramelized sugar, but they include flavors  from the Maillard reactions. Like the terminology, caramelized sugar and dairy  flavors blend easily with each other. This may be in part because one of the
important products of sugar caramelization is diacetyl, an aromatic chemical that  provides the pronounced buttery aroma of cultured butter(p. 35). Caramel has a  rich, complex flavor and consistency, viscous and sticky and creamy all at once,  that works well with most sweets and fruits, with coffee and chocolate, and even  with salt: the prized caramels of Brittany are made with a notable dose of sea salt.  Caramel, Caramels, Caramelization  These very similar words mean somewhat different things, and aren’t always  used consistently.  •   Caramelization   is the cooking of a plain sugar syrup until it turns brown  and aromatic. It is similar to the browning or Maillard reactions that give  color and aroma to roasted meats, baked goods, and other complex  foods, but unlike the browning reactions it proceeds in the absence of  amino acids and proteins. It requires higher temperatures than the  browning reactions, and produces a different mixture of aromatic  compounds and therefore a different flavor (p. 777). Cooks have spoken  of “caramelized” or “carmelized” meats for better than a century, but this  is not really correct.  •   Caramel   is first of all the brown, sweet, aromatic syrup produced in  caramelization, which may be used as coloring and/or flavoring  ingredient in many preparations. But cooks use the same word to mean  the combination of caramelized sugar and various milk products,  ideally cream, which are mixed while the sugar is still hot so that the  milk solids are browned and generate color and aroma as well. This kind  of caramel is often used as a sauce.  •   Caramels   are solid candies made from a mixture of caramelized sugar  and cream.  Sugar   Work   The   most   spectacular   sugar   preparations   are   those   that   take  advantage of sugar’s similarity to glass: its transparency and capacity to be  sculpted, blown, and drawn out into countless shapes. “Sugar work,” as such
preparations are called, goes back at least 500 years. A “nest of silken threads,”  probably similar to our spun sugar, was made from malt syrup for the Chinese  Imperial household before 1600; and in 17th-century Italy, various banquet  decorations,   including   dishes,   were   made   from   sugar.   In   Japan,   there   is   a  traditional street entertainment called “sweet candy craft,”   amezaiku,   in which the  performers sculpt flowers, animals, and other shapes while people watch.  The basic material for sugar work is molten sucrose mixed with a large portion of  glucose and fructose to help prevent crystallization. The glucose and fructose may  be added in the form of corn syrup, or the pure sugars, or they may be formed  from the sucrose itself during the cooking of the syrup with added acid (cream of  tartar). The sugar mixture is heated until it reaches 315–330ºF/157–166ºC, at which  point there is practically no water left. Any residual water can cause crystallization  and milkiness by making it easier for the sucrose molecules to move around and  nest together. At somewhat higher temperatures, the sugar begins to caramelize  and turn yellow-brown, which is undesirable for much sugar work but encouraged  for spun sugar and sugar cages, which are made by drizzling the hot syrup in  threads over a solid form or a wooden rack, where they harden almost instantly.  For more elaborate sugar work, the entire sugar mass is cooled to around 130–  120ºF/55–50ºC, a range in which it has a pliable, doughy consistency. Now it can  be handled and formed, blown like glass into hollow spheres and other shapes,  and kept workable with a heat lamp. Though pastry chefs with seasoned fingertips  can sculpt sugar barehanded, many use thin latex gloves in order to avoid  transferring moisture and skin oils from their fingers.  One of the more striking forms of sugar work is pulled sugar, which develops a  lovely delicate satin-like opacity. The cook pulls a piece of the sugar mixture into a  long rope, then folds and twists it onto itself and pulls again. By repeating this  action many times, he forms the sugar mixture into many fine, partly crystalline  strands separated by columns of air, a combination that becomes a solid fabric of  shiny threads.  Crystalline Candies: Rock Candy, Fondant, Fudge, Panned Candies, Lozenges  About the only candy in which large, coarse crystals are valued is rock candy, a  vivid demonstration of crystal growth. Simply cook a syrup to the hard ball stage,  then pour into a small glass, with a toothpick to serve as a removable foundation,  and let it sit for a few days. The resulting crystals can be preserved by washing the  encrusted stick briefly under cold water, shaking off the excess, and letting it dry.
Fondant and Fudge   Fondant and fudge are the two most common finely  crystalline candies, whose nature is to dissolve to a creamy consistency on the  tongue. The name   fondant   comes from the French   fondre,   meaning “to melt,” and  fondant is the base for what are called candy “creams,” the flavored, moist, melt-in-  the-mouth interiors of filled chocolates and other candies. It also serves as an icing  for cakes and pastries; it can be rolled out and molded onto a cake, or warmed or  thinned until runny and poured into a thin layer. Fudge is essentially fondant made  with added milk, fat, and sometimes chocolate solids (it can also be thought of as a  crystallized version of caramel). Penuche is fondant made with brown sugar (some  New Orleans pralines are penuche that includes pecans).  Fondant and fudge are made with the help of corn syrup, which favors the  production of small crystals. After the syrup has been boiled and then cooled to  130–100ºF/54–38ºC, the cook beats it continuously for about 15 minutes, until  crystallization is complete.  The texture of these candies depends on how much water they’re left with. If the  syrup has become especially concentrated, the texture will be dry and crumbly, the  appearance dull; if it’s less cooked or absorbs moisture from the air during cooling  and beating, it will be soft, even runny, the appearance glossy thanks to the  abundance of syrup between crystals. Small variations in water content — just 1 or  2% — make a noticeable difference. Fudge is more complex than fondant, its syrup  carrying milk solids and fat droplets as well as sugar crystals.  Panned Candies   These are the modern version of the medieval   dragées : flavorful  nuts or spices coated in sugar. There are two basic ways to coat candies in a pan. In  hard panning, the nut or spice or other center is rolled around a hot pan and  periodically   sprayed   with   a   concentrated   sucrose   syrup,   whose   moisture  evaporates and leaves behind tightly interlocked, hard layers of crystals, just 0.01–  0.02 mm thick. In soft panning, most often applied to jellybeans, the jelly candy is  rolled around in a cool pan with a glucose syrup and powdered sugar. Instead of  crystallizing, the syrup is absorbed by the powder, and excess moisture is dried off.  Soft-panned layers are thicker and less crystalline.  Lozenges   Lozenges are among the oldest and simplest of confections — they  require no high-temperature cooking. They’re made by preparing a binding agent  in water — gum tragacanth is standard, though gelatin also works — and then  making a “dough” by adding finely ground icing sugar and flavoring. The dough is
then rolled out, cut into pieces, and dried. Lozenges have a crumbly texture.  Aerated Candies: Marshmallow, Nougat   Candies with a light, chewy texture are  made by combining a sugar syrup with an ingredient that forms a stable foam. Egg  whites, gelatin, and soy protein are the most common foaming agents. Usually  they and interfering agents prevent the syrup from crystallizing, but some aerated  candies are made crystalline by combining a fine fondant with the foam.  Marshmallows   Marshmallows were first made in France from the gummy root  juice of the marsh mallow ( Althaea officinalis ), a weedy relative of the hollyhock;  the confection was called   pâte de Guimauve.   The juice was mixed with eggs and  sugar and then beaten to a foam. Today, marshmallows are made by combining a  viscous protein solution, usually gelatin, with a sugar syrup concentrated to about  the caramel stage, and whipping the mixture to incorporate air bubbles. The  protein molecules collect in the bubble walls, and this reinforcement, together  with the viscosity of the syrup, stabilizes the foam structure. The gelatin accounts  for 2–3% of the mixture, and produces a somewhat elastic texture. Marshmallows  made with egg whites are lighter and softer.  Nougat   Nougat is a traditional sugar candy made in Provence that contains nuts  and is aerated with egg-white foam. Italian   torrone   and Spanish   turron   are similar.  It’s a cross between a meringue and a candy, and is made by preparing a meringue  and then streaming hot, concentrated sugar syrup into it while continuing to beat.  It can be either soft and chewy or hard and crunchy depending on the degree to  which the sugar syrup is cooked and the proportion of sugar syrup to egg white.  Honey is often an ingredient.  Flashy Candies: Lightning in the Mouth  Mix together crystals of table sugar and essence of wintergreen and you get  something startling: a candy that seems to give off sparks when you eat it!  When highly orderly sucrose crystals are fractured between the teeth, the  sudden split leaves an imbalance of electrical charge between the two pieces:  there are more electrons on one side than the other. The electrons then jump  the gap to the more positively charged piece. En route, they collide with  nitrogen molecules in the air, which then discharge the sudden jolt of kinetic
energy in the form of light energy. The same kinds of electron jumping and  colliding produce lightning strikes between electrically charged clouds and  the earth. Of course, sugar crystals give off a much weaker glow than true  lightning. And much of that glow is in the invisible ultraviolet part of the light  spectrum. Here’s where the wintergreen plays a role. Its aromatic essence,  methyl salicylate, is fluorescent: it absorbs the invisible ultraviolet rays and re-  radiates them in the visible part of the light spectrum. It thus amplifies the  dimmer sucrose glow to the point that, in a dark room, we can see blue  flashes when the candy is crushed.  Chewy Jelly and Paste Candies; Marzipan   A number of different candies are  made by incorporating a sugar syrup into a solution of starch, gelatin, pectin, or  plant gums, and then allowing the mixture to solidify into a dense, chewy mass. In  Japan and elsewhere in Asia, sweets are often gelled with the seaweed extract agar  (p. 609), which is effective in unusually small amounts (as little as 0.1% of the mix).  Turkish Delight   Turkish delight, or   lokum rahat   in Turkish, is one of the most  venerable of this kind, having been made in the Middle East and the Balkans for  centuries. It is thickened with starch (around 4%), translucent, and traditionally  flavored with essence of rose.  Licorice   Licorice is usually made with wheat flour and molasses, around 30% and  60% of the mix respectively, with licorice extract around 5%; it’s dense and opaque,  like its flavor. The licorice is often complemented with anise, and in Scandinavian  countries there’s a curious pairing of licorice with ammonia — in foods, an aroma  usually encountered only in overripe cheeses!  Jelly Beans and Gummy Candies   These favorites are made with approximately  equal weights of sucrose and corn syrup and a mixture of gelatin and pectin. The  gelatin may be between 5 and 15% of the candy weight, and by itself produces an  increasingly elastic, even rubbery texture; pectin at around 1% introduces a  complex microstructure into the candy, gives a shorter, more crumbly texture and  also causes candy tastes and aromas to seem more intense. Gelatin is degraded in  high heat, so a concentrated solution is added to the sugar syrup after it has been  cooked and mostly cooled. These candies are relatively moist, being about 15%  water.
Marzipan   Marzipan is essentially a paste of sugar and almonds, has been made in  the Middle East and Mediterranean region for centuries, and is especially prized as  a sculptural material; it’s shaped and colored to resemble fruits and vegetables,  animals, people, and many other objects. The solid phase in nut pastes like  marzipan is provided by finely granulated sugar and the particles of nut proteins  and carbohydrates. It can be made by cooking almonds and syrup together and  then cooling and crystallizing the mixture; or ground almonds can be mixed with a  premade fondant and powdered sugar. Egg white or gelatin is sometimes added  to improve the binding.  Fizzy and Crackling Candies  Candies that fizz and crackle in the mouth were developed in the 19th  century by embedding the equivalent of baking powder in a very low-  moisture sugar syrup as it cools and hardens. Remember that baking powder  is a mixture of an acid together with alkaline baking soda. When the two  components are moistened together in a batter, they react to produce carbon  dioxide gas. Similarly, when the dry crystals of citric or malic acid and sodium  bicarbonate in a candy are moistened together in the mouth, they react and  form bubbles of carbon dioxide that provide the sensation of tartness and  prickly foaminess.  A 20th-century industrial twist on this idea produced Pop or Space Rocks,  which instantly burst and then disappear in the mouth. A scientist at General  Foods found that he could supercharge a concentrated sugar syrup with  carbon dioxide gas, then chill it down quickly and under pressure to lock the  gas in the solidified candy. When the candy is depressurized much of the gas  escapes, but some remains. And when the candy dissolves in the mouth’s  moisture, the gas bursts out with a startling crackle. Some chefs use these  gasified candies as a source of unexpected sensations; they embed them in  dishes that are sufficiently dry or cold not to dissolve them prematurely.
Chewing Gum  This quintessentially American confection has ancient roots. Humans have chewed  on gums, resins, and latexes secreted by various plants for thousands of years. The  Greeks named the resin of a kind of pistachio tree with their word for “to grind the  teeth together, to chew”: that was mastic (p. 421), whose root also gives us  “masticate.” Europeans and North Americans chewed the relatively harsh resin of  spruce trees; and the Maya chewed chicle, the latex of the sapodilla tree ( Achras  sapote ), ten centuries before it was commercialized in New York City. The idea of  mixing gum with sugar goes back to the early Arab sugar traders, who used the  exudation of certain kinds of acacia, a substance now known as gum arabic. It and  gum tragacanth are slightly soluble and eventually dissolve when chewed; they  were used in early medicine as carriers that would release drugs slowly. This is still  one of the purposes of chewing gum, which are to release a pleasant flavor for  some time while giving the jaw muscles something to do and stimulating a  cleansing flow of saliva.  Gum in America   The history of modern chewing gums begins in 1869, when a  New York inventor by the name of Thomas Adams was introduced to chicle from  Central and South America. Chicle is a latex, a milky, water-based plant fluid that  carries tiny droplets of long, coiled carbon-hydrogen chains. These chains have the  property of being elastic: they uncoil and stretch out when pulled, but snap back  when released. The best known of these latex substances is rubber. Adams got the  idea of using the chicle as a gum base, and patented chicle gum in 1871. With  sugar   and   sassafras   or   licorice   flavorings,   it   quickly   caught   on.   By   1900,  entrepreneurs with such names as Fleer and Wrigley had developed gumballs and  peppermint and spearmint flavors, and in 1928 a Fleer employee perfected bubble  gum by developing a very elastic latex mixture from longer hydrocarbon polymers.  Modern Synthetic Gums   Today, chewing gum is made mostly of synthetic  polymers, especially styrene-butadiene rubber — also found in auto tires — and  polyvinyl acetate — in adhesives and paints — though some brands still contain  chicle or jelutong, a natural latex from the Far East. The crude gum base is first  filtered, dried, and then cooked in water until syrupy. Powdered sugar and corn  syrup are mixed in, then flavorings and softeners — vegetable oil derivatives that  make the gum easier to chew — and the material is cooled, kneaded to an even,  smooth texture, cut, rolled thin, and cut again into strips, and packaged. The final
product is about 60% sugar, 20% corn syrup, and 20% gum materials. Sugar-free  gums are made using sugar alcohols and intensive sweeteners (p. 659).  Candy Storage and Spoilage  Because of their generally low water content and concentrated sugars, which draw  moisture out of living cells, candies are seldom spoiled by the growth of bacteria or  molds. Their flavor can be degraded, however, by the oxidation and consequent  rancidity of added fats, whether in milk solids or butter. This process can be slowed  down by refrigeration or freezing, but cold storage encourages another problem  called “sugar bloom.” Changes in temperature can cause moisture from the air to  condense on the candy surface, and some sugar will dissolve into the liquid. When  the moisture evaporates again or is drawn deeper into the candy, the surface sugar  crystallizes into a rough, white coating. Airtight wrapping will prevent sugar  bloom.  Chocolate  Chocolate is one of our most remarkable foods. It is made from the astringent,  bitter, and otherwise bland seeds of a tropical tree, yet its flavor is exceptionally  rich, complex, and versatile, the product of both fermentation and roasting. Its  consistency is like no other food’s: hard and dry at room temperature, melting and  creamy in the warmth of the mouth. It can be sculpted into almost any shape, and  its surface can be made as glossy as glass. And chocolate is one of the few  examples   of   a   food   whose   full   potential   was   first   revealed   in   industrial  manufacturing. The chocolate that we know and love, a dense, smooth, sweet  solid, has existed for only a tiny fraction of chocolate’s full history.  The History of Chocolate  An Exotic Drink   The story of chocolate begins in the New World with the cacao  tree, which probably evolved in the river valleys of equatorial South America. The  tree bears large, tough seed pods that also contain a sweet, moist pulp, and early  peoples may have carried the pods into Central America and southern Mexico as a  portable source of energy and moisture. It appears that the first people to cultivate  the tree were the Olmecs of the southern Gulf coast of Mexico. They in turn
introduced it sometime before 600   BCE   to the Maya, who produced it in the tropical  Yucatan peninsula and Central America, and traded it to the Aztecs in the cool and  arid north. The Aztecs roasted and ground cacao seeds and made them into a  drink that was served in religious ceremonies and associated with human blood.  The seeds were valuable enough to serve as a form of currency. The first Europeans  to see the cacao bean were probably the crew of Columbus’s fourth voyage in  1502, who brought some back to Spain. In 1519 one of Cortez’s lieutenants, Bernal  Diaz del Castillo, saw the Aztec emperor Montezuma at table and in passing  described the prepared drink:  Fruit of all the kinds that the country produced were laid before him; he ate  very little, but from time to time a liquor prepared from cocoa, and of an  aphrodisiac nature, as we were told, was presented to him in golden cups….  I observed a number of jars, above fifty, brought in, filled with foaming  chocolate, of which he took some….  One of the first detailed accounts of the original chocolate comes from the   History  of the New World   (1564) by the Milanese Girolamo Benzoni, who traveled in Central  America. He remarked that the region had made two unique contributions to the  world: Indian fowls,” or turkeys, and “cavacate,” or the cacao bean.  They pick out the kernels and lay them on the mats to dry; then when they  wish for the beverage, they roast them in an earthen pan over the fire, and  grind them with the stones which they use for preparing bread. Finally, they  put the paste into cups…and mixing it gradually with water, sometimes  adding a little of their spice, they drink it, though it seems more suited for  pigs than men.  …The flavor is somewhat bitter, but it satisfies and refreshes the body without  intoxicating:   the   Indians   esteem   it   above   everything,   wherever   they   are  accustomed to it.  Benzoni and other visitors reported that the Maya and Aztecs flavored their  chocolate drinks with a number of different ingredients, including aromatic  flowers, vanilla, chilli, wild honey, and achiote (p. 423). The Europeans then began  to add their own flavorings, among them sugar, cinnamon, cloves, anise, almonds,  hazel-nuts, vanilla, orange-flower water, and musk. According to the English Jesuit
Thomas Gage, they dried the cocoa beans and spices, ground them up and mixed  them together, and heated them to melt the cocoa butter and form a paste. Then  they scraped the paste onto a large leaf or piece of paper, allowed it to solidify, and  then peeled it off as a large tablet. According to Gage, there were several ways of  preparing chocolate, both hot and cold.  The one most used in Mexico is to take it hot with   atole   [a maize gruel],  dissolving a tablet in hot water, and then stirring and beating it in the cup  with a molinet, and when it is well stirred to a scum or froth, then to fill the  cup with hot   atole,   and so drink it sup by sup.  The first European “factories” for making the spiced chocolate paste were built in  Spain around 1580, and within 70 years chocolate had found its way into Italy,  France, and England. These countries purged the drink of most added flavorings  except sugar and vanilla. At first, vendors of lemonade sold it in Paris; coffeehouses  — themselves an innovation — served it London. But by the late 17th century,  chocolate houses were thriving in London as a kind of specialty coffeehouse. The  idea of making hot chocolate from milk seems to have arisen in these places.  Food Words:   Cocoa, Chocolate  The word   cocoa   comes via the Spanish   cacao,   which in turn came via the  Maya and Aztec from a probable Olmec word   kakawa   coined 3,000 years ago.  Chocolate   has a more complicated history. The Aztec (Nahuatl) word for  cocoa-water was   cacahuatl,   but the early Spanish coined   chocolate   for  themselves. According to historians Michael and Sophie Coe, they may have  done so to distinguish the hot Maya version that they preferred from the cold  Aztec one — in the Yucatan, “hot” was   chocol ; the Aztec for “water”   atl.  Early Chocolate Confections   For a couple of centuries, Europe knew chocolate  almost exclusively as a beverage. The use of the cacao bean in confectionery was  quite limited. The Englishman Henry Stubbe noted in his treatise on chocolate,   The  Indian Nectar   (1662), that in Spain and the Spanish colonies “there is another way  of taking it made into   Lozenges,   or shaped into Almonds,” and that people were
aware of what we now know to be the effects of the caffeine in chocolate: “The  Cacao-nut being made into Confects, being eaten at night, makes Men to wake all  night-long:   and   is   therefore   good   for   Souldiers,   that   are   upon   the   Guard.”  Cookbooks of the 18th century generally included a handful of recipes that call for  chocolate, among them dragées, marzipans, and biscuits, creams and ices and  mousses. There are some remarkable Italian recipes for lasagna sauced with  almonds, walnuts, anchovies, and chocolate, for liver with chocolate, and polenta  with chocolate. And in the 18th-century French   Encyclopédie,   we find that   chocolat  was commonly sold as a half-cocoa, half-sugar cake flavored with some vanilla and  cinnamon, and was not so much a delightful confection as an emergency meal —  perhaps the first instant breakfast!  When one is in a hurry to leave one’s lodgings, or when during travel one  does not have the time to make it into a drink, one can eat a tablet of one  ounce and drink a cup [of water] on top of that, and let the stomach churn  to dissolve this impromptu breakfast.  Even in the middle of the 19th century, the English compendium   Gunter’s Modern  Confectioner   devoted only four pages out of 220 to chocolate recipes.  Dutch and English Innovations: Cocoa Powder and Eating Chocolates   The  main reason for this lack of interest in solid chocolate was probably the coarse,  crumbly texture of the chocolate paste. The suave confections that are so popular  today were made possible by several innovations, the first of which came in 1828.  Conrad van Houten, whose family ran a chocolate business in Amsterdam, was  trying to find a way to make chocolate less oily so that the drink would be less  heavy and filling. The weight of the cacao bean is better than half fat, or “cocoa  butter.” Van Houten developed a screw press that removed most of the cocoa  butter from the ground bean — in itself, not a novelty — and then sold the  defatted   cocoa   powder, which   carries nearly all   the flavor,   for making   hot  chocolate. Cocoa powder was a long-lasting success, though recently there has  been a revival of interest in richer versions of hot chocolate full of cocoa butter.  At first, the pure cocoa butter extracted by Van Houten’s screw press was a mere  by-product. But it turned out to be the key to the development of modern  chocolate candy. This was cocoa butter that could be   added   to a paste of ordinary  ground cocoa beans and sugar to provide a rich, melting matrix for the dry  particles, and make the paste seem less pasty. The first solid “eating chocolate” was
introduced by the English firm of Fry and Sons in 1847, and soon inspired many  imitations throughout Europe and the United States.  Swiss Innovations: Milk Chocolate and Refined Texture   In 1917, Alice Bradley’s  Candy Cook Book   devoted an entire chapter to “assorted Chocolates,” and noted  that” more than one hundred different chocolates may be found in the price lists of  some manufacturers.” The South American bean had come of age as a major  ingredient in confectionery.  Two technical developments had helped expand chocolate’s appeal. In 1876, a  Swiss confectioner named Daniel Peter used the new dried milk powder produced  by his countryman Henri Nestlé to make the first solid milk chocolate. Not only do  milk flavors blend well with chocolate, but the milk powder dilutes the strong  chocolate flavor, and milk proteins reduce its astringency and make the taste  milder. Today, most chocolate is now consumed in the form of milk chocolate. Then  in 1878, a Swiss manufacturer named Rudolphe Lindt invented the conche, a  machine which ground cacao beans, sugar, and milk powder slowly for hours and  even days, and developed a much finer consistency than had been possible before.  This is the consistency that we now take for granted in even the most ordinary  chocolates.  Having contributed so much to the evolution of modern chocolate, the Swiss are  understandably the world’s champion chocolate eaters, and have been so for a  long time. At about an ounce/30 gm per day, Switzerland’s per capita consumption  is nearly double that of the United States.  Making Chocolate  The transformation of the fresh cacao bean into a finished chocolate is an  intriguing collaboration between the tremendous potential of the natural world  and   human   ingenuity   at   finding   nourishment   and   pleasure   in   the   most  unpromising materials. Right out of the pod, the bean is astringent, bitter, and  essentially aroma-less. Cacao farmers and chocolate manufacturers develop its  potential in several distinct processing steps:  •   Farmers ferment the mass of beans and pulp in order to generate the  precursors to chocolate flavor.  •   Manufacturers roast the fermented beans to transform flavor precursors into  flavors.
•   Manufacturers grind the beans, add sugar, and then physically work the  mixture to refine its flavor and create a silken texture.  The Cacao Bean   The cacao tree, named   Theobroma cacao   by Linnaeus —  theobroma   is Greek for “food of the gods” — is a broad-leaved evergreen that  grows between 20º north and south of the equator, and reaches about 20 feet/7 m  in height. It produces fruits in the form of fibrous pods from 6 to 10 inches/15–25  cm long, 3 or 4 inches/7.5–10 cm in diameter, and containing 20 to 40 seeds, or  “beans,” each about an inch/2.5 cm long, embedded in a sweet-tart pulp.  Cacao pods contain many large seeds that are covered with a sweet pulp. The seeds  consist mainly of the embryo’s tightly folded food-storage cotyledons, which are  speckled   with   purple   defensive   cells   rich   in   alkaloids   and   astringent   phenolic  compounds.  Varieties   There are a number of different cacao varieties that fall into three  botanical groups: the Criollos, Forasteros, and Trinitarios. Criollo trees produce  relatively mild beans with some of the finest, most delicate flavors, reminiscent of  flowers and tea. Unfortunately, they are also disease-prone, low-yielding trees, and  so provide less than 5% of the world crop. High-yielding, robust Forasteros provide  most of the world’s cacao crop in the form of full-flavored “bulk” beans. Trinitarios  are hybrids of a Criollo and Forastero, and have intermediate qualities.  West Africa (Ivory Coast and Ghana) now accounts for more than half of world  cacao production, and Indonesia also out-produces Brazil, the largest producer in
cacao’s original homeland.  Storage and Defensive Cells   Cacao beans consist mainly of the embryo’s storage  leaves, or cotyledons (p. 453), and contain two distinct groups of cells. Around 80%  of the cells are storage depots of protein and of fat, or cocoa butter, nutrients that  will feed the seedling as it germinates and develops on the shady floor of the  tropical forest. The other 20% are defensive cells meant to deter the many forest  animals and microbes from feasting on the seed and its nutrients. These cells are  visible in the cotyledons as purplish dots, and contain   astringent phenolic  compounds, their chemical relatives the anthocyanin pigments, and two bitter  alkaloids, theobromine and caffeine. The beans are moist, around 65% water. The  composition of the dried fermented beans is shown in the box on p. 698.  Fermentation and Drying   The first important step in the development of  chocolate flavor is the least controlled and predictable. Fermentation takes place  where cacao is grown, on thousands of small farms and larger plantations, and  may be done carefully or casually or not at all, depending on the resources and  skill of the farmer. The quality of cacao beans thus varies tremendously, from  unfermented to badly overfermented and even moldy. The first challenge for the  chocolate manufacturer is to find good-quality, fully fermented beans.  Soon after the cacao pods are harvested, workers break them open and pile the  beans and sugary pulp together at the ambient tropical temperature. Microbes  immediately begin growing on the sugars and other nutrients in the pulp. A  proper fermentation lasts from two to eight days, and generally has three phases.  In the first, yeasts predominate, converting sugars to alcohol and metabolizing  some of the pulp acids. As the yeasts use up the oxygen trapped in the pile, they  are succeeded by lactic acid bacteria, many of which are the same species found in  fermented dairy products and vegetables. When workers turn the mass of beans  and pulp to aerate it, the lactic bacteria are succeeded by acetic acid bacteria, the  makers of vinegar, which consume the yeasts’ alcohol and convert it into acetic  acid.  Fermentation Transforms the Beans   Cacao fermentation is a fermentation of the  pulp, not the beans, but it transforms the beans as well. The acetic acid produced  by the vinegar bacteria penetrates into the beans and etches holes in cells as it  does so, spilling the contents of the cells together and allowing them to react with  each other. The astringent phenolic substances mix with proteins, oxygen, and
each other, and form complexes that are much less astringent. Most important, the  beans’ own digestive enzymes mix with the storage proteins and sucrose sugar  and break them down into their building blocks — amino acids and simple sugars  — which are much more reactive than their parent molecules, and will produce  more aromatic molecules during the roasting process. Finally, the perforated beans  soak up some flavor molecules from the fermenting pulp, including sugars and  acids, fruity and flowery and winey notes. So a properly conducted fermentation  converts the astringent but bland beans into vessels laden with desirable flavors  and flavor precursors.  Drying   Once fermentation is complete, the cacao farmers dry the beans, often just  by spreading them out on a flat surface in the sun. Drying can take several days,  and if not done carefully can allow undesirable bacteria and molds to grow both  on and within the beans and taint them with undesirable flavors.  Once dried to about 7% moisture, the beans are resistant to further microbial  spoilage. They’re then cleaned, bagged, and shipped to manufacturers all over the  world.  The Composition of Dried Fermented Cacao Beans  % by weight  Water   5  Cacao butter   54  Protein and amino acids   12  Starch   6  Fiber   11  Sugars   1  Phenolic compounds   6  Minerals   3  Theobromine   1.2  Caffeine   0.2
Roasting   Dried fermented cacao beans are less astringent and more flavorful than  unfermented beans, but their flavor is still unbalanced and undeveloped, and  often dominated by vinegary acetic acid. After selecting, sorting, and blending the  dried beans, the chocolate manufacturer roasts them to develop their flavor. The  time and temperature vary according to whether the beans are to be roasted  whole, in their thin shell, or as the cracked inner kernels, the   nibs,   or as nibs that  have been ground into small, quickly heated particles. Whole beans take 30–60  minutes at 250–320ºF/ 120–160ºC. This is a much gentler treatment than coffee  beans require, thanks to the abundance of reactive amino acids and sugars that  readily participate in Maillard browning to generate flavor (p. 778). In fact, gentle  roasting helps preserve some of the flavors that are intrinsic to the beans or  developed during fermentation.  Grinding and Refining   After roasting, the beans are cracked open and the nibs  are separated from the shells. The nibs are then passed between several sets of  steel rollers, and are transformed from solid chunks of plant tissue into a thick, dark  fluid called cocoa liquor. This grinding stage has two purposes: to break the bean  cells open and release their stores of cocoa butter; and to break the cells down into  particles too small for the tongue to detect as separate, gritty grains. Because the  nibs are around 55% cocoa butter, this fat becomes the continuous phase, and the  solid fragments of the cells — mainly protein, fiber, and starch — are suspended in  the fat. The final grinding, or refining, brings the particle size down to 0.02–0.03  mm. Swiss and German chocolates have traditionally been ground smoother than  English and American.  Further treatment of the cocoa liquor varies according to the manufacturer’s  needs. To make cocoa powder and cocoa butter, the liquor is pressed through a  fine filter that retains the cocoa particles while allowing the butter to flow through.  The compacted cake of cocoa particles is then made into cocoa powder (below),  while the butter becomes an important ingredient in all kinds of manufactured  chocolate.  Conching   Pure cocoa liquor has a concentrated chocolate taste, and may be  hardened and packaged as is for use in baked goods. But its flavor is relatively  rough, bitter, and astringent and acidic. To make it into something not only edible  but delicious, manufacturers add a few other ingredients: sugar for dark chocolate,  sugar and dry milk solids for milk chocolate, some vanilla (the whole bean, or an  extract, or artificial vanillin), and a supplement of pure cocoa butter. And they
subject the mixture to an extended agitation called   conching,   a process named  after the shell-like shape of the first machines. Conches rub and smear the mixture  of cocoa liquor, sugar, and milk solids against a solid surface. The combination of  friction and supplemental heat raises the temperature of the mass to 115–  175ºF/45–80ºC (milk chocolate is kept at 110–135ºF/43–57ºC). Depending on the  machine and manufacturer, conching may last for 8 to 36 hours.  Refining Texture and Flavor   The original conche was a mechanized version of the  Mayan stone grinding slab: a heavy granite roller moved back and forth over a  granite bed, both mixing the ingredients together and grinding the still somewhat  coarse particles to a finer size. Today the various solids are ground to the proper  dimensions before conching, which now serves two main functions. First, it breaks  up small aggregates of the solid particles, separates them from each other, and  coats all of them evenly with cocoa butter, so that when the finished chocolate  melts, it flows smoothly. Second, conching greatly improves the flavor of the  chocolate, not by heightening it, but by mellowing it. The aeration and moderate  heat causes as much as 80% of the volatile aromatic compounds (and excess  moisture) to evaporate out of the chocolate liquor. Fortunately, many of these are  undesirable volatiles, including various acids and aldehydes; acidity steadily  declines during conching. At the same time, a number of desirable volatiles are  augmented by the heat and mixing, notably those with roasted, caramel, and  malty aromas (pyrazines, furaneol, maltol).  Both cocoa butter and a small amount of the emulsifier lecithin (p. 802) are added  to the chocolate mass toward the end of conching. The additional cocoa butter is  necessary to provide sufficient lubrication for all the added sugar particles to make  the mixture creamily fluid rather than pasty when it melts. The higher the ratio of  sugar to ground nibs, the more added cocoa butter is required. Lecithin, whose use  in chocolate dates to the 1930s, coats the sugar particles with the fat-like ends of  its molecules and helps reduce the amount of cocoa butter needed to lubricate the  particles; one part of lecithin replaces 10 parts of butter. It typically makes up 0.3–  0.5% of chocolate weight.  Cooling and Solidifying   After conching, dark chocolate is essentially a warm fluid  mass of cocoa butter that contains suspended particles of the original cacao beans  and of sugar. Milk chocolate also contains butterfat, milk proteins, and lactose, and  proportionally less cacao bean solids.
Manufacturing Chocolate and Cocoa  Making chocolate. As is true of cane sugar, chocolate is processed in two  stages, the first in the tropical cacao-growing countries and the second in  manufacturing plants throughout the world.  The last step in manufacturing chocolate is to cool the fluid chocolate to room  temperature and form the familiar solid bars. It turns out that this transition from  fluid to solid is a tricky one. To obtain stable cocoa butter crystals and a glossy,
snappy chocolate, manufacturers carefully cool and then rewarm the liquid  chocolate to particular temperatures before portioning it into molds, where it  finally cools to room temperature and solidifies.  Cooks often melt manufactured chocolate in order to give it a special shape or to  coat other foods. If they want it to resolidify with its original gloss and snap, then  they must repeat in the kitchen this cycle of warming up and cooling down, or  tempering   (p. 709).  The composition of dark and milk chocolates. Left: Dark chocolate consists of cacao-  bean particles and sugar crystals embedded in a base of cocoa butter. Right: In milk  chocolate, a significant proportion of cacao-bean particles is replaced with particles of  dried milk protein and sugar.  The Special Qualities of Chocolate  Consistency and Appearance: The Creations of Cocoa Butter   The remarkable  appearance and consistency of chocolate are a direct expression of the physical  qualities of cocoa butter, the part of chocolate that surrounds the solid particles of  cacao bean and holds them together. When carefully prepared, chocolate has a  silken or glassy surface, is hard and not greasy at room temperature, breaks with a  delightful snap, yet melts to a smooth creaminess in the mouth. These are very  unlike the qualities of any other food, and are a consequence of the structure of
cacao fat molecules, which are mostly saturated and unusually regular (most of  them are constructed from just three kinds of fatty acids). This structure means  that the fat molecules are capable of forming a dense network of compact, stable  crystals, with little liquid fat left over to ooze out between the crystals.  However, this special network only develops when the fat crystallization is carefully  controlled. Cocoa butter can solidify into six different kinds of fat crystals! Only two  are stable kinds that produce a glossy, dry, hard chocolate; the other four are  unstable kinds that produce a looser, less organized network, with more liquid fat,  and crystals whose fat molecules readily detach and ooze away. When chocolate  melts and then resolidifies in an uncontrolled way — for example, when it’s  temporarily left too close to a hot stove, or in a hot car — it’s the unstable crystals  that predominate, and they produce a greasy, soft, mottled chocolate. To rescue its  original consistency, such chocolate must be tempered.  The crystallization of cocoa butter. Left: In melted chocolate, the fat molecules (p. 798)  of cocoa butter are in constant random motion. Center: When chocolate cools in an  uncontrolled way, the fat molecules form loosely packed, unstable crystals, and the  chocolate is soft and greasy. Right: When chocolate is carefully cooled, its fat  molecules form tightly packed, stable crystals, and the chocolate is snappy and dry.  Chocolate Flavor   Chocolate has one of the richest and most complex flavors of  any food. In addition to its slight acidity, pronounced bitterness and astringency,  and the sweetness of its added sugar, chemists have detected more than 600
different kinds of volatile molecules in chocolate. While a handful of these may  account for the basic roasted quality, many others contribute to its depth and wide  range. The richness of chocolate flavor arises from two factors. One is the cacao  bean’s intrinsic flavor potential, its combination of sugars and proteins, and the  enzymes that break these down into the building blocks of flavor. The second  factor is the complexity of chocolate’s preparation, which combines the chemical  creativity of microbes and of high heat.  Among the flavors that an attentive taster can detect in chocolate are these:  •   From the bean itself, astringency and bitterness (phenolic compounds,  theobromine)  •   From the fermented pulp, the flavors of fruits and wine and sherry and  vinegar (acids, esters; alcohols; acetaldehyde; acetic acid)  •   From   the   self-digested   bean,   almond   and   dairy   and   flowery   notes  (benzaldehyde; diacetyl and methyl ketones; linalool)  •   From roasting and the browning reactions, roasted, nutty, sweet, earthy,  flowery, and spicy notes (pyrazines and thiazoles; phenyls; phenylalkanals;  dienals), as well as a more pronounced bitterness (diketopiperazines)  •   From added sugar and vanilla, sweetness and the warm character of the  spice  •   From added milk solids, caramel and butterscotch and cooked-milk and  cheese notes  Chocolate made from poorly fermented or handled beans can have a variety of  unpleasant aromas, among them rubbery, burned, smoky, hammy, fishy, moldy,  cardboard, and rancid notes.  Some confectioners add a small amount of salt to their products, especially milk  chocolates.   Saltiness   is   the   one   basic   taste   sensation   missing   from   simply  sweetened chocolate, and adding it is said to give the overall flavor a certain bite  and clarity.  The Different Flavors of Milk Chocolate  The milk chocolates made in Europe, England, and the United States have
traditionally had distinct flavors. In continental Europe, where it was invented,  milk chocolate is made using dried whole milk powder, which has a relatively  fresh milk flavor. In England, the preference has been to mix liquid milk with  sugar, concentrate the mixture to 90% solids, mix it with chocolate liquor, and  finish drying it into a material called “chocolate crumb.”   The milk proteins and  sugars undergo browning reactions during the concentration and drying and  produce a special cooked-milk, caramelized flavor that isn’t obtained by  ordinary drying. And in the United States, large manufacturers have long  encouraged their milk fat to undergo some breakdown by fat-digesting  enzymes. This breakdown develops a slight note of rancidity, whose cheesy,  animal overtones blend well in their own way with chocolate flavor and make  a positive contribution to the complexity of flavor.  The Kinds of Chocolate  Manufacturers produce a wide range of different chocolates, some meant for  eating as is, some meant for cooking or confectionery, some for all three. They fall  into several general categories.  •   Mass-produced, inexpensive chocolates are made from ordinary beans that  are processed in largely automated plants, and contain the minimum  amount of cocoa solids and cocoa butter and the maximum amounts of  sugar and milk solids. Their flavor is mild and unremarkable.  •   “Fine” expensive chocolates are made from beans selected for their excellent  flavor   potential,   often   processed   in   small   batches   to   optimize   flavor  development, and contain far more than the minimum amount of cocoa  solids and cocoa butter. Their flavor is stronger and more complex.  •   Dark chocolate contains cocoa solids, cocoa butter, and sugar, but no milk  solids. It is manufactured in a range of compositions, from sugarless   bitter , to  bittersweet ,   to   sweet.   Some   manufacturers   now   label   their   premium  chocolates with their content of cocoa beans: “70% chocolate” is 70% by  weight cocoa butter and cocoa solids, and about 30% sugar; “62% chocolate”  is about 38% sugar (there are also small amounts of lecithin and vanilla). The  higher the proportion of cocoa solids, the more intense the chocolate flavor,
including its bitterness and astringency. Strong chocolates deliver more  flavor to cream, egg, and flour mixtures, whose proteins bind to the phenolic  substances and reduce the apparent astringency.  •   Milk chocolate is the most popular form of chocolate, and the mildest. It  contains milk solids and a large proportion of sugar, which together usually  outweigh the combination of cocoa solids and cocoa butter. Thanks to its  relatively low cocoa butter content, milk chocolate tends to be softer and  less snappy than bittersweet chocolate.  •   Couverture chocolate (from the French for “to cover”) is dark or milk  chocolate formulated to flow easily when melted, and therefore to work well  for forming thin, delicate chocolate coatings. This means adding more cocoa  butter than usual to provide plenty of room for the cocoa and sugar particles  to move past each other. Most couvertures are 31–38% fat.  •   “White chocolate” is chocolate-less chocolate: it contains no cocoa particles  whatsoever, and therefore has little or no chocolate flavor. White chocolate  was invented around 1930, and is a mixture of purified, usually deodorized  cocoa butter, milk solids, and sugar. It does offer a valuable decorative  contrast to ordinary chocolate.  Some manufacturers are now packaging nibs, or small pieces of the roasted beans,  which   offer   crunchy   particles   of   intense   flavor.   Whole   roasted   beans   can  sometimes be found in Latin markets.  Storing Chocolate; Fat Bloom   The best storage temperature for chocolate is a  constant   60–65ºF/15–18ºC,   without   fluctuations   that   would   encourage   the  melting and recrystallization of the cocoa butter fats. Sometimes stored chocolate  will develop a white, powdery-looking coating on its surface. This “fat bloom” is  cocoa butter that has melted out of unstable crystals, migrated to the surface, and  formed new crystals there. Fat bloom is normally prevented by proper tempering  of the chocolate in the first place. Its development can be slowed down by the  addition to the melted chocolate of some clarified butter, which makes the mix of  fats more random and so retards the formation of crystals.  Thanks to its abundant antioxidant molecules and chemically stable saturated fats,  chocolate has a remarkably long shelf life. It keeps for many months at room  temperature. White chocolate, which lacks the antioxidants in the cocoa solids, has  a room-temperature shelf life of only a few weeks; after that, or sooner if it’s  exposed to bright light, its fats are damaged and it develops a stale, rancid flavor.
The Composition of Some Kinds of Chocolate  Chocolates vary widely in composition, especially among “bittersweet” and  “semisweet” versions. The figures below, which are given in percent of the  chocolate weight, are very approximate, but useful for broad comparisons.  Minimum  cocoa   solids  +   added  cocoa  butter, U.S.  Cocoa  liquor  Added  cocoa  butter   Sugar  Milk  solids   Total fat  Tot al  carbo-  hydrates   Protein  Unsweeten-  ed  99   0   0   0   53   30   13  Bittersweet/  semisweet  35   70–35   0–15   30–50   0   25–38   45–65   4–6  Sweet (dark)   15   15   20   60   0   32   72   2  Milk   10   10   20   50   15   30   60   8  Unsweeten-  ed   cocoa  powder  20   40   15  Cocoa Powder   Manufacturers produce cocoa powder from the cakes of roasted  cocoa bean particles left behind when they extract cocoa butter (p. 699). The  particles remain coated with a thin layer of cocoa butter; the fat content of the  powder ranges from 8 to 26%. The solid particles of the cacao bean are the source  of chocolate’s flavor and color. Cocoa is therefore the most concentrated version of  chocolate, and a valuable ingredient in its own right. Natural cocoa powder has a  strong chocolate taste and pronounced astringency and bitterness. It’s also  distinctly acid, with a pH around 5.  “Dutched” or Alkalized Cocoa   In Europe and sometimes the United States, cocoa  powder is produced from cocoa beans that have been treated with an alkaline  substance, potassium carbonate. This treatment, sometimes called “dutching”  because its inventor was the Dutch chocolate pioneer Conrad van Houten, raises  the cocoa pH to a neutral 7 or alkaline 8. The application of an alkaline material to  the beans either before or after roasting has a strong influence on their general
chemical composition. In addition to adding a distinctly alkaline taste (like that of  baking   soda),   alkaline   treatment   reduces   the   levels   of   roasty,   caramel-like  molecules   (pyrazines,   thiazoles,   pyrones,   furaneol)   and   of   astringent,   bitter  phenolics, which now bond to each other to form flavorless dark pigments. The  result is a cocoa powder with a milder flavor and darker color. Dutched cocoa can  be produced in shades running from light brown to nearly black; the darker the  color, the milder the flavor.  Chocolate Cools the Mouth  Well-made chocolate has an unusual and refreshing characteristic for such a  rich food: as it melts, it cools the mouth. This happens because its stable fat  crystals melt in a very narrow temperature range, and just below body  temperature. The phase change from solid to liquid absorbs much of the  mouth’s heat energy and leaves little to raise the temperature of the  chocolate, which therefore feels persistently cool.  Cocoas in Baking   It’s important for bakers to be aware of the difference between  “natural” and alkalized cocoa powders. Some recipes rely on acidic natural cocoa to  react with baking soda and generate leavening carbon dioxide. If the same recipe  is made with an alkalized cocoa, the reaction won’t take place, no carbon dioxide  will be generated, and the taste will be alkaline and soapy.  Instant Cocoa   So-called “instant” cocoas for hot chocolate include lecithin, an  emulsifier that helps separate the particles so that they mix readily with water.  Sugar is frequently added to instant cocoa mix and may account for up to 70% of  its weight.  Chocolate and Cocoa as Ingredients  Chocolate and cocoa are versatile ingredients. They’re incorporated into many  mixtures of ingredients, and not just sweets; savory Mexican mole sauces and  some European meat stews and sauces borrow depth and complexity from them.  Chocolate and cocoa provide flavor, richness, and structure-building capacity; their
dry particles contain both starch and protein, absorb moisture, and contribute  thickness and solidity to baked goods, soufflés, fillings and icings. Flourless cakes  can be made with chocolate or cocoa as the starchy and fatty ingredients, eggs as  the moistening and setting agent. In a chocolate mousse, the foam structure  provided by the whipped eggs is reinforced by both the dry particles and the  gradually crystallizing cocoa butter.  Of course, chocolate can be presented as is, part of a pastry construction for  example, or melted over a preparation and then hardened to provide a coating. It’s  when we melt and cool it for coating or molding that it requires the most care (p.  708). Otherwise, keeping in mind a few facts about chocolate will prevent most  problems.  Working with Chocolate   Dark chocolate is a fully cooked, fully developed  ingredient in its own right, robust and forgiving. Remember that it has been  roasted and then heated again to fairly high temperatures in the conche, and that  it’s a relatively simple physical mixture of cocoa and sugar particles in fat. The most  that a cook needs to do to it is melt it to perhaps 120ºF/50ºC, but it can be heated  to 200ºF/93ºC and then   some without suffering disastrous effects. It won’t  separate, and it won’t burn unless it’s left over direct stovetop heat or in a  microwave oven without stirring. It can be melted and solidified repeatedly if  necessary.  Because they contain more milk solids than they do cocoa solids, milk chocolate  and white “chocolate” are less robust than dark chocolate and are best melted  gently.  Melting Chocolate   Chocolate can be successfully melted in several different ways:  quickly, over direct stove heat, with care and constant stirring to avoid burning;  more slowly, but with less attention; in a bowl set over a pan of hot water, from  100ºF/38ºC to the simmer (the hotter the water, the faster it melts); in the  microwave   oven,   with   frequent   interruptions   for   stirring   and   checking   the  temperature. Because chocolate is a poor heat conductor, it’s best to chop it into  small pieces or process it into crumbs to speed its melting, or its blending with hot  ingredients.  Chocolate and Moisture   The one vulnerable aspect of chocolate is its extreme  dryness, and the vast number of tiny sugar and cacao particles whose surfaces  attract moisture. If a small amount of water is stirred into molten chocolate, the
chocolate will seize up into stiff paste. It seems perverse that adding liquid to a  liquid produces a solid: but the small amount of water acts as a kind of glue,  wetting the many millions of sugar and cocoa particles just enough to make  patches of syrup that stick the particles together and separate them from the  liquid cocoa butter. It’s important, then, either to keep chocolate completely dry, or  to add enough liquid to dissolve the sugar into a syrup, not just wet it. It’s therefore  best to add solid chocolate to hot liquid ingredients, or pour the hot liquid all at  once onto the chocolate, rather than add the liquid gradually to molten chocolate.  Seized chocolate can be salvaged by adding more warm liquid until the paste  turns into a thick fluid.  Different Chocolates Are Not Interchangeable   Both recipe writers and cooks need  to be as precise as possible about the kinds of chocolate they use. Different  chocolates have very different proportions of cocoa butter, cocoa particles, and  sugar. The proportions of cocoa particles and sugar are especially important when  chocolate is combined with wet ingredients. Sugar dissolves into syrup, thereby  increasing the volume of a preparation’s liquid phase and contributing fluidity,  while cocoa particles absorb moisture, decrease the volume of the liquid phase,  and reduce fluidity. A recipe developed for sweet chocolate may fail badly if it’s  made with a 70% premium bittersweet chocolate, which has far more drying cocoa  particles and far less syrup-making sugar.  Ganache   Once of the simplest and most familiar of chocolate preparations is  ganache, a mixture of chocolate and cream that can be infused with many other  flavors, whipped to lighten its richness, or further enriched with butter. It serves as  a filling for chocolate truffles and pastries, and as both filling and topping for  cakes. The dessert called pot de crème, made by melting some chocolate into  about twice its weight of cream, is essentially a ganache served on its own.  Ganache Structure   A soft ganache is made with approximately equal weights of  cream and chocolate. A firm ganache, more suitable for holding a shape and with a  stronger chocolate flavor, is made with two parts chocolate for every one of cream.  To make ganache, the cream is scalded and the chocolate melted into it to form a  complex combination of an emulsion and a suspension (p. 818). The continuous  phase of this mixture, the portion that permeates it, is a syrup made from the  cream’s water and the chocolate’s sugar. Suspended in the syrup are the milk fat  globules from the cream, and cocoa butter droplets and solid cocoa particles from  the chocolate.
In an even mixture of cream and chocolate, there’s an abundance of the syrup  phase to hold the fat and particles; but in a firm, high-chocolate mixture, there’s  less syrup, and proportionally more cocoa particles that slowly absorb moisture  from the syrup and reduce its volume even further. With chocolates high in cocoa  solids, the cocoa particles can eventually absorb so much moisture that they swell  and stick to each other. The water-deprived emulsion then fails, allowing the fat  globules and droplets to coalesce, and the fat to separate from the swollen  particles. This is why high-chocolate ganaches are often unstable and coarsen with  time.  The structure of ganache. Left: Soft ganache is made with an equal proportion of  chocolate and cream, with cocoa particles and droplets of cocoa and milk fat  surrounded by a syrup of the chocolate’s sugar and the cream’s water. Center: A firm  ganache, made with more chocolate than cream, contains proportionally more dry  cocoa particles and less water. Right: With time, the cocoa particles in a firm ganache  absorb water from the syrup and swell. This can crowd the fat droplets so tightly that  they coalesce and the ganache separates.  Maturing Ganache   Many confectioners let ganache mixtures stand at a cool room  temperature overnight before working with them. This gradual cooling allows the  cocoa butter to crystallize so that when the ganache is shaped or eaten, it softens  and melts more slowly. Ganache refrigerated immediately after making hardens  without forming many crystals, and becomes soft and greasy when it warms.
Thanks to the initial scalding of the cream and the chocolate’s sugar content,  moisture-absorbing cocoa particles, and abundant microbe-unfriendly phenolic  compounds, ganache has a surprisingly long shelf life of a week or more at room  temperature.  Food Words:   Ganache  The word   ganache   is French, and before it was applied to a mixture of  chocolate and cream, it meant “cushion.”   The confectioner’s ganache is indeed  a kind of melting cushion for the mouth, soft and plush. Ganache seems to  have been invented in France or Switzerland in the middle of the 19th  century. Chocolate truffles, morsels of ganache shaped into rough balls and  coated either with cocoa powder or a thin layer of hard chocolate, were a  simple homemade sweet until well into the 20th century, when they became  fashionable luxuries.  Tempered Chocolate for Coating and Molding  Like   sugar,   chocolate   can   be   shaped   to   please   the   eye.   Pastry   cooks   and  confectioners make thin chocolate sheets by brushing melted chocolate onto a  surface, then letting the chocolate set completely, and stamping or cutting it into  shapes, or nudging it into a ruffle. Melted chocolate can be painted onto plant  leaves, allowed to harden into the leaves’ mirror images, then gently peeled off. It  can be squeezed through a pastry bag and tip to form a myriad of lines, drops, and  filled shapes. And of course it can be used to line molds and produce shapes from  hollow spheres to Easter bunnies.  Chocolate lovers often melt chocolate and then use it as a coating for cookies or  strawberries or handmade truffles. This can be done easily and casually, the  chocolate simply warmed until it melts and then used immediately, the results  sometimes chilled in the refrigerator to speed their solidification. Chocolate  handled in this way will taste fine, but it’s likely to look dull and mottled, and to be  soft instead of snappy. This is because the chocolate cooled down so quickly that  its cocoa fat solidified into a loose, weak network of unstable crystals instead of the
dense, hard network of stable crystals. If appearance and consistency matter, as  they do to professional cooks and confectioners, then the cook must   temper   the  melted chocolate, or prime it with desirable stable crystals of cocoa fat, just as the  manufacturer did before forming it into bars.  Tempering Chocolate   The tempering process consists of three basic steps:  heating the chocolate to thoroughly melt all of its fat crystals, cooling it somewhat  to form a new set of starter crystals, and carefully heating it again to melt the  unstable crystals, so that only desirable stable crystals remain. The stable starter  crystals will then direct the development of the dense, hard crystal network when  the chocolate finally cools and solidifies.  Unstable cocoa butter crystals are crystals that melt relatively easily, which means  at relatively cool temperatures, between about 59 and 82ºF/15–28ºC. The desirable  stable crystals (sometimes referred to as “beta” or “beta prime” or “Form V” crystals)  melt   only   at   warmer   temperatures,   between   89   and   93ºF/32–34ºC.   The  temperature range in which a particular kind of crystal melts is also the range in  which it   forms   as the chocolate cools. Unstable crystals therefore form when  molten chocolate is cooled rapidly, so that the stable crystal types — the ones that  begin to form at warmer temperatures — don’t have time to gather most of the fat  molecules to themselves before the unstable crystals begin to form. Stable crystals  predominate in melted chocolate when the cook carefully holds it at temperatures  above   the melting point of the unstable crystals, but   below   the melting point of  the stable crystals. This tempering range is 88–90ºF/31–32ºC for dark chocolate,  somewhat lower for milk and white chocolates thanks to their mixture of cocoa  and milk fats.  Tempering Methods   There are several different ways to obtain melted chocolate  that is in temper. All of them require an accurate thermometer, a gentle heat  source (often a pot of hot water over which the bowl of chocolate can be held),  and the cook’s full attention. And all of them end with the chocolate at a  temperature where stable crystals can form and unstable crystals can’t.  Of the two common methods for tempering chocolate, one creates the stable  crystals from scratch, while the other uses a small amount of tempered chocolate  to “seed” the melted chocolate with stable crystals.  •   To temper the chocolate from scratch, heat it to 120ºF/50ºC to melt all  crystals, and cool it down to around 105ºF/40ºC. Then either stir the
chocolate as it cools further, until it thickens noticeably (an indication of  crystal formation), or pour a portion onto a cool surface and scrape and mix  it until it thickens, and return it to the bowl. Then carefully raise the  temperature of the chocolate to the tempering range, 88–90ºF/31–32ºC, and  stir to melt any unstable crystals that might have formed during the stirring  or scraping.  •   To seed melted chocolate with stable crystals, chop and hold in reserve a  portion of solid tempered chocolate. Heat the chocolate to be tempered to  120ºF/50ºC to melt all crystals, and cool it to 95–100ºF/35–38ºC, just above  the temperature range in which stable crystals form. Then stir in the solid  portion with its stable crystals, while keeping the temperature in the  tempering range, 88–90ºF/31–32ºC.  No matter how chocolate is tempered, its temperature must be held in the  tempering range until it is used. If allowed to cool, it will begin to solidify  prematurely,   won’t   flow   evenly,   and   produces   an   uneven   consistency   and  appearance.  Temperatures for Tempering Different Kinds of Chocolate  The ideal temperatures for preparing milk and white chocolates depend on  the formulation of the particular chocolate, and are best obtained from the  manufacturer. This chart gives figures generally used in the chocolate  industry.  Kind of  Chocolate  Melting  Temperature  Cooling  Temperature   Tempering Range  Dark   113–122ºF/45–50ºC   82–84ºF/28–29ºC   88–90ºF/31–32ºC  Milk   104–113ºF/40–45ºC   80–82ºF/27–28ºC   86–88ºF/30–31ºC  White   104ºF/40ºC   74–76ºF/24–25ºC   80–82ºF/27–28ºC  Melting Tempered Chocolate While Maintaining It in Temper   It’s also possible to  obtain tempered melted chocolate without actually doing the tempering. Nearly  all manufactured chocolate is sold in tempered form. A cook using new, well-made
chocolate can warm it carefully and directly to the tempering range, 88–90ºF/31–  32ºC, so that it melts but still retains some of its desirable fat crystals. This is easily  done by stirring the finely chopped chocolate in a bowl over a pot filled with water  at 90–95ºF/32–34ºC. If for some reason the chocolate is overheated, so that it loses  all of its fat crystals, or if the cook is using previously melted and resolidified  chocolate with a mixture of crystals, then it’s necessary to temper the chocolate  with one of the methods described above.  Tempering chocolate. To make chocolate with stable fat crystals, the cook first heats  the chocolate to melt all the crystals. In one method, he then cools the chocolate to  the temperature range in which only stable crystals can form, adds a portion of  tempered chocolate to provide stable crystal seeds, and keeps the mixture warm until  it’s used for molding or coating. In a second method (dotted line) , the cook allows the  molten chocolate to cool below the stable-crystal temperature and form a mixture of  crystal types, then warms it to melt the unstable crystals while retaining the stable  ones.  The Art of Tempering   Though an accurate thermometer and careful temperature  control are necessary for successful tempering, they aren’t sufficient. The art of  tempering lies in recognizing when the chocolate has accumulated   enough   stable  crystals to form a dense, hard network as it cools. Insufficient tempering time, or  insufficient stirring, produce too few stable crystal seeds and undertempered  chocolate, which will form some unstable crystals when it cools. Too much stirring  or   time   produce   too   many   or   too   large   stable   crystals   and   overtempered  chocolate, in which individual crystals predominate over the joined network.  Overtempered chocolate is stable, but it can seem coarse, crumbly rather than
snappy, dull in appearance, and waxy in the mouth.  Testing for Temper   Molten chocolate can be tested for its temper by placing a  small, thin portion on a room-temperature surface, a plate or piece of foil. Properly  tempered chocolate solidifies in a few minutes to a clean, silky-surfaced mass; the  side in contact with the cool surface is shiny. Chocolate out of temper takes many  minutes to harden, and has an irregular powdery or grainy appearance.  Working with Tempered Chocolate   Once chocolate has been tempered, it must  be handled so that it stays in temper. It should be kept warm, in the tempering  range of 88–90ºF/31–32ºC. When shaped, it should be poured into molds or  coated onto fillings that are neither so cold that they cause the cocoa butter to  solidify quickly and unstably, nor so warm that they melt the stable crystal seeds in  the   chocolate.   Confectioners   recommend   a   temperature   around   77ºF/25ºC.  Similarly, the room temperature should be moderate, neither chilly nor hot.  It turns out that tempered chocolate shrinks by about 2% in each dimension as it  solidifies, because the fat molecules in the stable crystals are more densely packed  than they were in liquid form. This shrinkage is helpful in making molded  chocolates, because the chocolate pulls away from the mold as it hardens. But it  can cause the thin coating on a candy or truffle to crack, especially if the filling is  cold and expands slightly when coated with the warm chocolate. The snappy  hardness of tempered chocolate takes several days to develop fully as the crystal  network continues to grow and become stronger.  Specialty Coatings  Ordinary chocolate is not well suited for certain kinds of coatings, including  those on ice cream and other frozen ingredients, and candies that are eaten in  the heat of the summer or the tropics. For these kinds of products,  manufacturers have developed replacements for cocoa butter that don’t  require tempering to look good, break with a snap, and remain hard at high  temperatures. Some closely resemble cocoa butter and can be mixed with  chocolate, while others are very different, not compatible with chocolate, and  must be flavored with low-fat cocoa. Among the former are fats purified from  a number of tropical nuts (palm, shea, illipe, sal); among the latter are “lauric
fats” derived from coconut and palm oils. Coatings made with these  ingredients are often called “nontempering” chocolates.  Modeling   Chocolate   “Modeling” or “molding” chocolate   is   a   version   made  expressly for shaping into decorations. It’s made by mixing molten chocolate with  a third to half its weight of corn syrup and sugar, then kneading the mixture into a  pliable mass. The resulting “chocolate” is now a concentrated sugar syrup that is  filled and thickened with cocoa particles and droplets of cocoa butter. The pieces  stiffen as the syrup phase loses moisture to the air and to the dry cocoa particles.  Chocolate and Health  Fats and Antioxidants   Cocoa beans, like all seeds, are rich in nutrients that  support the plant embryo until it develops leaves and roots. They’re especially rich  in saturated fats, which are notorious for contributing to raised blood cholesterol  levels and therefore to the risk of heart disease. However, much of the saturated fat  in cocoa butter is a particular fatty acid that the body immediately converts into an  unsaturated one (stearic acid is converted to oleic acid). So chocolate is not  thought to pose a risk to the heart. In fact, it may well be beneficial. Cocoa particles  are a tremendously rich source of antioxidant phenolic compounds, which account  for 8% of the weight of cocoa powder. The higher the cocoa solids content of a  chocolate or candy, the higher its antioxidant content. Any added sugar, milk  products, or cocoa butter simply dilute the cocoa solids and their phenolics. The  dutching process also reduces the levels of desirable phenolics in cocoa powder,  and the milk proteins in milk chocolate appear to bind to the same molecules and  prevent us from absorbing them.  Caffeine   and   Theobromine   Chocolate   contains   two   related   alkaloids,  theobromine and caffeine, in the ratio of about 10 to 1. Theobromine is a weaker  stimulant of the nervous system than caffeine is (p. 433); its main effect seems to  be a diuretic one. (However it is quite toxic to dogs, who can suffer serious  poisoning from chocolate candies.) A 1-oz /30 gm piece of unsweetened chocolate  contains around 30 mg of caffeine, around a third the dose in a cup of coffee;  sweetened and milk chocolates contain substantially less. Cocoa powder has  around 20 mg caffeine per tablespoon/10 g.
Cravings for Chocolate   Because many people, especially women, experience  cravings for chocolate that border on the symptoms of addiction, it has been  thought that chocolate might contain psychoactive chemicals. Chocolate does  turn out to contain both “cannabinoid” chemicals — chemicals similar to the active  ingredient in marijuana — as well as other molecules that cause brain cells to  accumulate cannabinoid chemicals. But these are present in extremely small  amounts that probably have no practical significance. Similarly, chocolate contains  phenylethylamine, a naturally occurring body chemical that has amphetamine-like  effects — but then so do sausages and other fermented foods. In fact there is good  experimental evidence that chocolate does not contain any drug-like substances  capable of inducing a true addiction. Psychologists have shown that chocolate  cravings can be satisfied by imitations that have no real chocolate in them, while  these cravings are not satisfied by capsules of genuine cocoa powder or chocolate  that are swallowed without tasting. It appears to be the sensory experience of  eating chocolate, no more and no less, that is powerfully appealing.  Object 12
Wine, Beer, and Distilled Spirits  Like all good foods, wine, beer, and spirits nourish and satisfy the body. What sets  them apart is the very direct way in which they touch the mind. They contain  alcohol, which is both a source of energy and a drug. In moderate amounts,  alcohol causes us to feel and express emotions of all kinds — happiness,  conviviality, sadness, anger — with more freedom. In large amounts, it’s a narcotic:  it numbs feeling and clouds thought. Alcoholic drinks thus offer various degrees of  release from our usual state of mind. Small wonder that they were once considered  an earthly version of the nectar of the gods, foods that give mortals a taste of  being carefree masters of life!  Humankind has always had a thirst for alcohol, and now satisfies it with mass-  produced drinks that offer an inexpensive respite from the world and its cares. But  some wines and beers and spirits are among the most finely crafted foods there  are, the best that the world and care have to offer. Their flavor can be so rich,  balanced, dynamic, and persistent that they touch the mind not with release from  the world, but with a heightened attentiveness and connection to it.  Wine, beer, and spirits are the creation of microscopic yeasts, which break food  sugars down into alcohol molecules. Alcohol is a volatile substance whose own  aroma is relatively diffuse. It has the effect of lending a new dimension to the flavor  of grapes and grains, a kind of open stage on which the food’s own volatile  molecules can appear. Yeasts are also prodigious flavor chemists, so during the  fermentation they fill that stage with dozens of new aromas. The winemaker or  brewer then directs the transformation of this teeming, unruly cast into a balanced,  harmonious ensemble.  Though they share this basic nature, wine and beer and spirits are very different  foods. Wine begins with fruits that are fragrant and sweet with sugars, and  therefore ready-made to ferment into an aromatic drink — but only during the few  days of the year when they’re ripe. Grapes and wine are a gift of nature, a form of  grace, which the winemaker must accept when they’re given, and can leave largely  to themselves to realize their innate potential for producing flavor. Beer and rice  alcohols, by contrast, are the expression of everyday human effort and ingenuity.
They’re made from sugarless, aroma-less dry grains, the charmless but dependable  staff of life. Brewers transform grains into something fermentable and aromatic by  sprouting them or cultivating molds on them for days, and cooking them for  hours. They can do this at any time of the year, anywhere in the world. Beer is thus  our universal alcohol, comfortably local and everyday and ordinary, yet sometimes  extraordinary. And distilled spirits are the heart of wine and beer, concentrates of  their volatile and aromatic content, and drinks of unmatched intensity.  The pleasure of tasting a good beer or wine or spirit grows with the recognition  that its flavor is the expression of many natural, cultural, and personal particulars: a  place and its traditions, certain plants and the soil they grew in, a year and its  weather, the course of fermentation and maturation, the taste and skills of the  maker. Their rich natural and human parentage explains why alcohols are so  absorbingly diverse, and why a thoughtful sip can momentarily fill us with the  world and delight.  The Drink of Happiness  Nearly 4,000 years ago, a Sumerian poet put these words into the mouth of  the goddess Inanna, who ruled both heaven and earth and was as delighted  as any mortal by the experience of drinking beer. Ninkasi was the goddess of  beer. (I’ve omitted the poem’s many repetitions.)  May Ninkasi live together with you!  Let her pour for you beer [and] wine,  Let [the pouring] of the sweet liquor resound  pleasantly for you!  In the…reed buckets there is sweet beer,  I will make cupbearers, boys, [and]  brewers stand by,  While I circle around the abundance of beer,  While I feel wonderful, I feel wonderful,  Drinking beer, in a blissful mood,  Drinking liquor, feeling exhilarated,  With joy in the heart [and] a happy liver —
While my heart full of joy,  [And] [my] happy liver I cover with a  garment fit for a queen!  The heart of Inanna is happy again,  The heart of the queen of heaven is happy again!  — Transl. Miguel Civil  The Nature of Alcohol  Alcohol molecules are made in many living cells as a by-product of breaking down  sugar molecules for their chemical energy. Most cells then break down the alcohol  molecules to extract their energy content too. The great exception to this rule is  certain yeasts, which excrete alcohol into their surroundings. Like the lactic acid in  cheeses and pickled vegetables, like the powerful aromas in herbs and spices, the  alcohol in wine and beer is a defensive chemical weapon, which the yeasts deploy  to protect themselves against competition from other microbes. Alcohol is toxic to  living cells. Even the yeasts that make it for us can only tolerate a certain amount.  The pleasant feeling that it gives us is a manifestation of the fact that it’s disrupting  the normal function of our brain cells.  Yeasts and Alcoholic Fermentation  Yeasts are a group of about 160 species of single-celled microscopic molds. Not all  are useful: some cause the spoilage of fruits and vegetables, some cause human  disease (for example, the yeast infection of   Candida albicans ). Most of the yeasts  used   in   making   bread   and   alcoholic   drinks   are   members   of   the   genus  Saccharomyces,   whose name means “sugar fungus.” We cultivate them for the same  reason that we use particular bacteria to sour milk: they make foods resistant to  infection by other microbes, and produce substances that are mainly pleasant to  us. Essential to the yeasts’ production of alcohol is their ability to survive on very  little oxygen, which most living cells use to burn fuel molecules for energy, leaving  behind only carbon dioxide and water. In the absence of oxygen, the fuel can be
broken down only partly. The overall equation for the production of energy from  glucose without oxygen goes like this:  C 6 H 12 O 6   2CH →   3 CH 2 OH + 2CO 2   + energy  Glucose   alcohol + carbon dioxide + energy →  Yeasts introduce a variety of other compounds into the grape juice or grain mash  that contributes characteristic flavors. For example, they produce savory succinic  acid, and transform amino acids in the liquid into “higher,” or longer-chain alcohols;  they combine alcohols with acids to make fruity-smelling esters; they produce  sulfur compounds reminiscent of cooked vegetables, coffee, and toast. And when  a yeast cell dies, its enzymatic machinery digests the cell and releases its contents  into the liquid, where they continue to generate flavor. Because growing yeast cells  synthesize proteins and B vitamins, they can actually make a fruit juice or cereal  mash more nutritious than it was when fresh.  Yeast. Cells of brewer’s yeast, Saccharomyces cerevisiae, as seen through an electron  microscope. Each is about 0.005 mm in diameter. The cell at the upper right center is in  the process of reproducing, and bears the scars of previous buddings.  The Qualities of Alcohol  In chemistry, the term   alcohol   is applied to a large family of substances with a  similar molecular structure. Our everyday word   alcohol   refers to one particular  member of this family, which chemists call   ethyl alcohol,   or   ethanol.   In this chapter  I’ll use   alcohol   in its common sense, but I’ll also refer to “higher” alcohols, or  molecules in the alcohol family with more atoms than ethanol has.
Ethanol, or common alcohol. The versatile ethanol molecule has one end that  resembles the fatty-acid carbon chain of fats and oils, and one end that resembles  water.  Alcoholic Fermentation Helped Form Modern Biology  The mystery of fermentation attracted some of the best and most headstrong  scientists of the 19th century, including Justus von Liebig and Louis Pasteur,  and helped give rise to the science of microbiology. The first microorganisms  to be isolated in pure cultures were beer and wine yeasts prepared in the  laboratory of the Carlsberg Brewery in Copenhagen around 1880. And  scientists coined the word   enzyme,   denoting the remarkable protein  molecules that living cells use to transform other molecules, from the Greek  words for “in yeast,” where sugar is transformed into alcohol.  Physical and Chemical Qualities   Pure alcohol is a clear, colorless liquid. The  alcohol molecule is a small one, CH 3 CH 2 OH, whose backbone is just two carbon  atoms. One end of the alcohol molecule, the CH 3 , resembles fats and oils, while the  OH group at the other end is two-thirds of a water molecule. Alcohol is therefore a  versatile liquid. It mixes easily with water, but also with fatty substances, including  cell   membranes,   which   it   excels   at   penetrating,   and   aroma   molecules   and  carotenoid pigments, which it excels at extracting from cells. The higher alcohols,  which yeasts also produce in small quantities and which become concentrated in  distilled spirits, have a longer fat-like end to their molecules (p. 762), and behave  more like fats. They lend an oily, viscous quality to whiskies and other spirits. They  also tend to concentrate in the membranes of our cells, and therefore are more
irritating and more potent narcotics than simple alcohol.  Several of alcohol’s physical properties have important consequences for the cook  and food lover.  •   Alcohol is more volatile than water, more easily evaporated and brought to  the boil. Its low boiling point, 176ºF/78ºC, is what makes it possible to distill  alcohol into a much stronger solution than wine or beer.  •   Alcohol is flammable, which makes possible spectacular flaming dishes  fueled by brandy or rum. The food doesn’t get scorched because the heat of  combustion is fully absorbed by the vaporization of the spirits’ water.  •   Alcohol has a much lower freezing point than water, –173ºF/–114ºC. This  makes it possible to concentrate alcoholic liquids in winter cold or the  freezer (see box, p. 761).  •   A given volume of alcohol weighs 80% as much as the same volume of  water, so a mixture of alcohol and water is lighter than pure water. This helps  makes possible layered cocktails (see box, p. 770).  Alcohol and Flavor   We experience the presence of alcohol in a food through our  senses of taste, smell, and touch. The alcohol molecule bears some resemblance to  a sugar molecule, and indeed it has a slightly sweet taste. At high concentrations,  those typical of distilled spirits and even some strong wines, alcohol is irritating,  and produces a pungent, “hot” sensation in the mouth, as well as in the nose. As a  volatile chemical, alcohol has its own distinctive aroma, which we experience at its  purest in unflavored grain alcohol or vodka. Its chemical compatibility with other  aroma compounds means that concentrated alcohol tends to bind aromas in foods  and drinks and inhibit their release into the air. But at very low concentrations,  around 1% or less, alcohol actually enhances the release of fruity esters and other  aroma molecules into the air. This is one reason that wine, vodka, and other  alcohols are valuable ingredients in general cooking, provided that the proportion  is small or the alcohol mostly removed by long cooking.  Effects on Living Things   One consequence of alcohol’s chemical versatility is that  it readily penetrates the membranes of living cells, which are made in part of fat-  like molecules. When it does so, it disturbs the action of the membrane proteins. A  high enough concentration of alcohol will cause such a disturbance that this  critical boundary between cell and environment fails, and the cell dies. The yeasts  that produce alcohol can tolerate a concentration of about 20%, and most other
microbes are killed by much less. When the solution also contains acid or sugar, as  in wines, alcohol is an even more effective microbial poison. This is why, unlike  beer and wine, distilled spirits and such alcohol-fortified wines as sherry and port  don’t spoil after they’re opened.  Our own pleasant inebriation when we drink alcohol is in part a symptom of mild  membrane and protein disturbance throughout our nervous system.  The Tears of Strong Wine and Spirits  Regular drinkers of strong wines and spirits have probably mused upon the  odd phenomenon known as “tears” or “legs,” films of liquid on the inside of the  glass that seem to be in slow but constant movement up and down. These  moving films are created by the dynamic nature of alcohol-water mixtures.  Alcohol lowers the forces of attraction between water molecules in wine or  spirits; but at the edge of the surface, alcohol evaporates from the water, the  water bonds more strongly to itself and to the glass, and the decreasingly  alcoholic water pulls itself up the side of the glass until gravity wins out and it  falls back in a droplet. The higher the alcoholic content of the liquid, and the  easier it is for alcohol to evaporate — warm temperatures and wide-mouthed  shallow glasses are most favorable — the more pronounced the tears and  legs are.  Alcohol as a Drug: Intoxication  Alcohol is a   drug : it alters the operation of the various tissues into which it diffuses.  We value it most for its influence on the central nervous system, where it acts as a  narcotic. The fact that it seems to stimulate more animated, excited behavior than  usual is actually a symptom of its depressant effect on the higher functions of the  brain, those that normally control our behavior with various kinds of inhibition. As  more alcohol reaches the brain, it interferes with more basic processes: memory,  concentration, and thinking in general; muscular coordination, speech, vision. With  regard to the idea that alcohol is an aphrodisiac, modern investigators continue to  cite the OWNERity of the Porter in Shakespeare’s   Macbeth , who says of drink that
“Lechery, sir, it provokes, and unprovokes: it provokes the desire, but it takes away  the performance.”  The degree to which someone is intoxicated depends on the concentration of  alcohol in the cells. Once alcohol is absorbed from the digestive tract, the blood  rapidly distributes it to all body fluids, and it readily diffuses into and across  membranes to penetrate all cells. Large people can therefore drink more than  small people without being drunker: they have a greater volume of body fluids  and cells in which to dilute the alcohol. Impaired coordination and impulsive  behavior usually appear when the concentration of alcohol in the blood is 0.02–  0.03%. Falling-over drunkenness is the result at 0.15%, and 0.4% can be fatal.  The Source of Happiness and Oblivion  Observers of the human condition have long remarked on the ways in which  alcohol helps people deal with that condition. Here are two of the earliest and  simplest formulations, from the Ayurvedic tradition of India, and from the Old  Testament.  Wine is the foremost of all things that lead to cheerfulness.  Abuse of wine is the foremost of all causes that lead to loss of  intelligence and memory.  —   Charaka-Samhita,   ca. 400   BCE  Give strong drink unto him that is ready to perish, and wine unto them  that be of heavy hearts. Let him drink, and forget his poverty, and  remember his misery no more.  — Proverbs, ca. 500   BCE  As drugs go, alcohol is a relatively weak one. It takes grams of pure alcohol, not  milligrams, to have noticeable effects, and this allows us to enjoy moderate  amounts of wine and beer without harming ourselves. But like other narcotic  drugs, alcohol can be addictive, and the habitual consumption of large quantities  is destructive. It has been the cause of widespread misery and premature death for  thousands of years, and it still is. Alcohol and the molecule to which it’s first
metabolized, acetalde-hyde, disrupt many systems and organs in the body. Their  constant presence can therefore cause a broad range of serious and even fatal  diseases.  How the Body Metabolizes Alcohol  Our bodies eliminate alcohol by breaking it down in a series of chemical reactions  and using the energy freed by those reactions. Alcohol’s chemical structure has  similarities to both sugar and fat, and it has a nutritional value between the two,  around 7 calories per gram (sugar has 4 calories per gram, fat 9). It provides around  5% of the calories in the American diet, much more among heavy drinkers.  Alcohol is broken down and converted into energy in two organs, the stomach and  the liver. The “first-pass” metabolism of alcohol in the stomach consumes a portion  before it gets to the small intestine and then into the blood. That portion is around  30% in men, but only 10% in women. Men therefore experience a slower rise in  blood alcohol when they drink, and can drink more before they feel its effects. And  there are strong genetic influences on how well individuals are able to handle  alcohol.  The Benefits of Moderate Drinking  O ne consistent finding from several decades’ worth of studies is that people who  regularly consume the equivalent of one or two alcoholic drinks per day die less  often from heart disease and stroke. (Higher consumption is associated with higher  death rates from cancer and accidents.) Alcohol itself raises the levels of desirable  HDL cholesterol and lowers the levels of blood factors that induce clotting and thus  contribute to blockages. And red wine and dark beer are good sources of  antioxidant phenolic compounds (p. 255). Wine phenolics also cause arteries to  widen and reduce the tendency of red blood cells to stick together, and a few of  these compounds, notably   resveratrol   and its relatives, inhibit an enzyme  (cyclooxygenase) that’s associated with damaging inflammation reactions and the  development of arthritis and certain cancers.  Overall, the body can metabolize around 10–15 grams of alcohol per hour, the
equivalent of one standard-sized drink every 60–90 minutes. The level of alcohol in  the blood reaches a maximum 30–60 minutes after consumption. Foods, and  especially fats and oils, delay the passage of the stomach’s contents into the small  intestine, giving the stomach enzymes more time to work, slowing the rise in  blood alcohol, and reducing its peak to about half of what it reaches on an empty  stomach.   On   the   other   hand,   aspirin   interferes   with   the   stomach’s   alcohol  metabolism and so causes a quicker rise in blood alcohol levels. The carbon  dioxide bubbles in sparkling wines and beer cause the same accelerated rise by as  yet unknown means.  The Hangover   Then there’s the misery of the hangover, the general feeling of  illness that we wake up with the morning after we’ve had too much alcohol. The  folk remedies for this affliction are many and ancient. In medieval times, the  medical school of Salerno was already recommending the hair of the dog:  Si nocturna tibi noceat potatio vini,  Hoc tu mane bibas iterum, et fuerit medicina.  If an evening of wine does you in,  More the next morning will be medicine.  The hangover is in part a mild withdrawal syndrome. The night before, the body  adjusted to a high concentration of alcohol and related narcotic chemicals, but by  morning the drug is going or gone. Hyper-sensitivity to sound and light, for  example, may be a leftover compensation for the general depression of the  nervous system. The logic of the morning-after drink is simple but insidious: it  restores many of the conditions to which the body had become accustomed, as  well as lightly anesthetizing it. But this only postpones the body’s true recovery  from intoxication.  Only a few of the different symptoms that constitute a hangover can be directly  treated. The dry mouth and headache can be due to the dehydration that alcohol  causes, so that drinking liquids may relieve them. Alcohol can also cause a  headache by enlarging the cranial blood vessels; the caffeine in coffee and tea has  the opposite effect, and may bring some relief.  Cooking with Alcohol  Cooks use wines, beers, and distilled spirits as ingredients in a broad range of
dishes, from savory soups and sauces and stews to sweet creams and cakes,  soufflés and sorbets. They contribute distinctive flavors, often including acidity,  sweetness, and savoriness (from glutamic and succinic acids), and the aromatic  dimension provided by alcohol and other volatile substances. Some qualities can  be a challenge for the cook to work with, including the astringency of red wines (p.  737) and the bitterness of most beers. The alcohol itself also provides a third kind  of liquid — in addition to water and oil — into which flavor and color molecules  can be extracted and dissolved, as well as reactive molecules that can combine  with other substances in the food to generate new aromas and greater depth of  flavor. While large amounts of alcohol tend to trap other volatile molecules in the  food, small traces boost their volatility and so intensify aroma.  At the same time that alcohol itself can be an asset for the cook, it can also be a  liability. Alcohol has its own pungent, slightly medicinal qualities, and these  qualities are heightened and can become harsh in hot foods. Cooks may therefore  simmer or boil sauces for some time to evaporate off as much alcohol as possible.  In the showy preparation called the   flambé,   from the French for “to flame,” they  ignite the heated vapors of spirits and high-alcohol wines into flickering, ghostly  blue flames to burn off the alcohol and give a lightly singed flavor to a dish.  However, none of these techniques leave a food free of alcohol. Experiments have  shown that long-simmered stews retain about 5% of the alcohol initially added,  briefly cooked dishes from 10 to 50%, and flambés as much as 75%.  Alcoholic Liquids and Wood Barrels  The great good fortune of wine and beer is that microbes can “spoil” fruit juice and  gruel into something both delicious and pleasantly inebriating. A few centuries  ago, winemakers and distillers discovered another remarkable piece of good luck:  simply storing wine, spirits, and vinegars in wood barrels turns out to give them a  new and complementary dimension of flavor.  Oak and Its Qualities   Though chestnut and cedar have been used in Europe and  redwood in the United States, most barrels for aging wines and spirits are made  from oak. Oak heartwood, the older inner wood, is a mass of dead cells that  supports the outer living layers. The heartwood cells are filled with compounds  that deter boring insects. These are mainly tannins, but they include such aromatic  compounds as clove-like eugenol, vanilla-like vanillin, and oaky “oak lactones,”
relatives of the characteristic aromatics of coconut and peach. From 90 to 95% of  the heartwood solids are cell-wall molecules, cellulose, hemicellulose, and lignin.  These are mostly insoluble, but the lignins can be partly broken down and  extracted by strong alcohol, and all can be transformed into new aromatic  molecules when the wood is heated during barrel making (p. 449).  Coopers rely mainly on two European oak species ( Quercus robur   and   Q. sessilis ),  and ten North American species, the most important being the white oak ( Q. alba ).  The European species are mostly made into wine barrels, American oak into barrels  for aging distilled spirits. American oak tends to have lower levels of extractable  tannins and higher levels of the oak lactones and vanillin.  Making Barrels: Forming and Cooking   In order to make barrels, the cooper splits  the heartwood into pieces, dries them, and forms them into thin, elongated staves,  which are then roughly hooped together and heated to make them more pliable  and easily bent into the final barrel shape. In Europe, the barrel interior is heated  with a small brazier of burning wood scraps to 400ºF/200ºC. Once the softened  staves have been tightly hooped into their final positions, the interior is “toasted”  further at 300–400ºF/150–200ºC, for 5 to 20 minutes, depending on the degree of  cooking desired: less for wine barrels, more for spirits. In the United States, the heat  treatment for whiskey barrels is more extreme. The hooped staves are first steamed  to soften them, and then the barrel interior is charred with an open gas burner for  from 15 to 45 seconds.  Barrel Flavors   Several things happen when alcoholic liquids are stored in new  barrels. First, the liquid extracts soluble materials that contribute color and flavor,  including tannins, oak and clove and vanilla aromas, and the sugars, browning-  reaction products, and smoky volatiles formed when the barrel was heated. In the  charred American barrels used for whiskey, the carbonized surface acts something  like an activated charcoal absorbant, removing some materials from the whiskey  and so accelerating the maturation of its flavor. Gaps and pores in the wood allow  the liquid to absorb limited amounts of oxygen. And the rich chemical brew of  wine or spirits, wood components, and oxygen slowly undergoes innumerable  reactions and evolves toward a harmonious equilibrium.  New oak barrels give a pronounced flavor to liquids stored in them, one that can  overwhelm the inherent qualities of delicate wines. The producer can control the  contribution of the wood by limiting the aging time in new barrels, or by working
with used barrels, which have already had much of their flavor components  extracted.  Barrel Fermentation  Some wines and vinegars are fermented in the barrel as well as matured there  after fermentation, and develop a distinctive barrel-fermented flavor. One  unusual component of that flavor, produced by the action of yeast enzymes  on compounds found in toasted oak, is a sulfur-containing chemical whose  aroma is reminiscent of roasted coffee and roasted meat (furfurylthiol).  Alternatives to Barrels   Oak barrels are expensive, so only relatively expensive  wines and spirits are aged in them. There are other ways of getting oak flavor into  less expensive products.   Boisés,   extracts made by boiling wood chips in water, are a  traditional finishing additive in French brandies, including Cognac and Armagnac.  In recent years, large-volume winemakers have begun putting barrel staves, oak  chips, and even sawdust into wines while they mature in containers made of steel  and other inert materials.  Wine  The juice of the grape is just one of the naturally sweet liquids with which our  ancestors learned to make alcoholic drinks. Perhaps just as ancient as grape wine is  koumiss,   the fermented mare’s milk of the central Asian nomads. One Greek word  for wine,   methu,   came from the Indo-European word for fermented honey water,  whose name in English is   mead.   The Romans fermented dates and figs. And before  they tasted wine, the inhabitants of northern Europe drank apple juice fermented  into cider.  But the grape turned out to be uniquely suited to the development of a diverse  family of alcoholic drinks. The grapevine is a highly productive plant that can adapt  to a wide range of soils and climates. Its fruits retain large amounts of an unusual  acid, tartaric acid, which few microbes can metabolize, and which favors the  growth of yeasts. The grapes ripen with enough sugar that the yeasts’ alcohol
production can suppress the growth of nearly all other microbes. And they offer  striking colors and a variety of flavors.  Thanks largely to these qualities, grapes are the world’s largest fruit crop, with  about 70% of the annual production used to make wine. France, Italy, and Spain  are the world’s largest wine producers and exporters.  Food Words:   Wine, Vine, Grape  Our language bears witness to the fact that from the very earliest times,  people thought of the grapevine not as the source of edible fruit, but as the  source of wine. Our words   vine   and   wine   come from the same root word, and  that word meant the fermented juice of the vine’s fruit. This root is so ancient  that it predates the divergence of Indo-European from other prehistoric  languages of western Asia. The words for the fruit itself, on the other hand, are  different in different languages. The English word   grape   appears to come from  an Indo-European root meaning “curved” or “crooked,” probably referring to  the curved blade of the knife used to harvest grape bunches, or to the shape  of the bunch stem.   Grapple   and   crumpet   are related words.  The History of Wine  The evolution of wine is long and fascinating, and ongoing. Here are a few  highlights.  Ancient Times: Aged Wines   and Connoisseurship   As   I   write,   the   earliest  evidence we have for wine made from grapes, residues at the bottom of a pot  found in western Iran, dates from around 6000   BCE . From 3000   BCE   on, wine was a  prominent part of trade in western Asia and Egypt. Wild grapes and the first wines  were red, but the Egyptians had a color mutant of the grape plant and made white  wines from it. They would ferment grape juice in large clay jars. The contents of the  jars were eventually sampled and graded, and the jars marked, stoppered, and  sealed with mud. The airtight containers allowed wine to be aged for years. Many  wine amphoras found in the tombs of the pharaohs carry labels with the date of
production, the region in which the wine was made, sometimes a brief description  and the name of the winemaker. Wine connoisseurship is ancient!  Greece and Rome   Phoenician and Greek traders introduced the cultivated vine  throughout the Mediterranean basin, where the Greeks developed the cult of  Dionysos, god of vegetation, the vine, and the temporary release from ordinary life  that wine made possible. By Homer’s time, about 700   BCE , wine had become a  standard beverage in Greece, one that was made strong, watered down before  drinking, and graded in quality for freeman and slave. The culture of the vine was  not established in Italy until about 200   BCE , but it took hold so well that the Greeks  took to calling southern Italy   Oenotria,   “land of the grape.”  Over the next couple of centuries, Rome advanced the art of winemaking  considerably. Pliny devoted a full book of his   Natural History   to the grape. He noted  that there were now an infinite number of varieties, that the same grape could  produce very different wines in different places, and named Italy, Greece, Egypt,  and Gaul (France) as admired sources. Like the Egyptians, the Romans had airtight  amphoras that allowed them to age wine for years without spoiling. The Greeks  and Romans also preserved and flavored wines with tree resins or the pitch refined  from them, salt, and spices.  It was in Roman times that wooden casks — an innovation of northern Europe —  arrived along the Mediterranean as an alternative to clay amphoras. During  subsequent centuries, they became the standard wine vessel, and amphoras  disappeared. Casks had the advantage of being lighter and less fragile, but the  disadvantage of not being airtight. This meant that wines could only be stored in  them for a handful of years before they became overoxidized and unpleasant to  drink. Excellent aged wines therefore disappeared along with the amphora, and  only reappeared after more than a thousand years with the invention of the cork-  stoppered bottle (p. 724).  The Spread of Winemaking in Europe; the Rise of France   After the fall of Rome  around the 5th century   CE , Christian monasteries advanced the arts of viticulture  and winemaking in Europe. Local rulers endowed them with tracts of land, which  they then cleared of forest and reclaimed from swamps, bringing systematic,  organized agriculture to sparsely settled regions, and the grape to northern France  and Germany. Wine was required for the sacrament of Communion, and it and beer  were made for daily consumption, to serve guests, and to sell. It was in the Middle
Ages that the wines of Burgundy became famous.  From the late Middle Ages on, France slowly became the preeminent source of  wine in Europe. By the 1600s the wines of France, and especially Bordeaux, which  had the advantage being a port, were important exports to England and Holland.  Meanwhile Italy fell behind, a victim of political and economic circumstance. Until  the middle of the 19th century it was not a nation but a collection of city-states,  each with protective tariffs and little of the international trade that brought  competition and improvement to the wine regions of France. Most of the wine was  consumed locally, and the grapevines grown not in vineyards but in sharecroppers’  plots, between rows of food plants or trained on trees.  New Wines and New Containers   Early modern times brought the invention of  several   wonderful   variants   on   plain   fermented   grape   juice,   and   important  improvements in wine storage. Sometime before 1600, Spanish winemakers found  that they could both stabilize and give a new character to wines by fortifying them  with brandy; the result was sherry. Around 1650, Hungarian winemakers managed  to make deliciously concentrated and very sweet Tokaji wine from grapes infected  by an otherwise destructive fungus, which came to be known as the “noble rot.”  This was the forerunner of French Sauternes and similar sweet German wines. At  about the same time, English importers of white wine from the Champagne region  east of Paris discovered that they could make the wine delightfully bubbly by  transferring it from barrel to bottles before it had finished fermenting. And a few  decades later, the English developed port in the effort to stabilize strong red wines  during their sea journey from Portugal. The shippers added distilled alcohol to the  wines to prevent spoilage, and thus discovered the pleasures of fortified sweet red  wines.  Bottles and Corks   The 17th and 18th centuries brought two major innovations  that once again made it possible to age wines for many years, a possibility that had  disappeared when the impermeable amphora was replaced by wood barrels.  These momentous developments were slim bottles and cork stoppers! The English  discovery of sparkling Champagne depended on the fact that they had begun  plugging bottle necks with compressible gas-tight cork instead of cloth, and that  they had especially strong bottles that could withstand the inner pressure (the  glass strength came from manufacturing with hot coal fires rather than wood  fires). And during the 18th century, the wine bottle gradually evolved from a short,  stout flask to the familiar elongated bottle. The bulky bottles were only used to
convey the wine from barrel to table or to hold it for a day or two. When bottles  had slimmed down enough that they could lie on their sides, their contents  wetting the cork and preventing it from shrinking and admitting air, then wine  could be stored in them for many years without spoiling, and sometimes with  great improvements in flavor.  Pasteur and the Beginnings of a Scientific Understanding of Wine   In 1863 the  French Emperor Louis Napoleon asked the great chemist Louis Pasteur to study the  “maladies” of wine. Three years later, Pasteur published the landmark   Etudes sur le  vin.   Pasteur and others had already demonstrated that yeast is a living mass of  microbes, and thus had made it possible to begin to identify and control the kinds  of microbes that both make wine and spoil it. But Pasteur was the first to analyze  the development of wine, to discover the central role of oxygen, and show why  both barrel and bottle were indispensable for making good wine, the barrel for  providing oxygen to the young wine to help mature it, and the bottle for excluding  oxygen from the mature wine to help preserve it.  In my view, it is oxygen which   makes   wine; it is by its influence that wine  ages; it is oxygen which modifies the harsh principles of new wine and  makes the bad taste disappear…  It is necessary to aerate the wine slowly to age it, but the oxidation must not be  pushed too far. It weakens the wine too much, wears it out, and removes from red  wine nearly all its color. There exists a period…during which the wine must pass  from a permeable container [the barrel] to one nearly impermeable [the bottle].  Scientific Approaches to Making Wine   Pasteur planted the seed of a scientific  approach to winemaking. That seed soon took root in both France and the United  States. In the 1880s, the University of Bordeaux and the University of California  established institutes of oenology. The Bordeaux group focused on understanding  and   improving   traditional   French   methods   for   producing   fine   wines,   and  discovered the nature of the malolactic fermentation (p. 730). The California  institute moved from Berkeley to Davis in 1928, and studied how best to build a  wine industry in the absence of a local tradition, including determining what grape  varieties were best suited to various climatic conditions. Today, thanks to this and  similar work in a number of countries, and to the general modernization of  winemaking, more good wine is being made in more parts of the world than ever  before.
Traditional and Industrial Wines   There’s now a spectrum of approaches among  winemakers, and so a spectrum of wines from which we can choose. At one end is  the relatively straightforward approach found in traditional winemaking regions:  the grapes are grown in a place and with methods that maximize wine quality;  they’re simply crushed, fermented, the new wine matured for some time, and  bottled. At the other end of the spectrum are advanced manufacturing processes  that treat grapes and wine like other industrial materials. These aim to approximate  the qualities of the traditionally produced wine by nontraditional means that are  less labor intensive and less expensive. The grapes themselves need not be coaxed  to   an   ideal   ripeness   because   the   winemaker   can   use   various   separation  technologies to adjust their content of water, sugar, acid, alcohol, and other  components. The effects of barrel and bottle aging can be simulated inexpensively  and rapidly by means of oak chips or sawdust, and the bubbling of pure oxygen  through wine stored in huge steel tanks.  Industrial wines are marvels of reverse engineering, and often taste good, clean,  and without obvious faults. Wine made on a small scale with minimal manipulation  is less predictable in its quality, but this is because it is more distinctive, an  expression of grapes   that   were grown in a   particular place and year, and  transformed by a particular winemaker. Such wine is more expensive than  industrial wine, sometimes much better, and usually more interesting.  Wine Grapes  Grapes provide the substance of wine, and therefore determine many of its  qualities. Their most important components are  •   Sugars, which the yeasts feed on and convert into alcohol. Wine grapes are  generally harvested with 20–30% sugar, mainly glucose and fructose.  •   Acids, mainly tartaric and some malic, which help prevent the growth of  undesirable microbes during fermentation, and are a major component of  wine flavor.  •   Tannins and related phenolic compounds, which contribute an astringent  feeling and thereby a body and weightiness to wine (p. 737).  •   Pigment   molecules   that   provide   color,   and   sometimes   contribute   to  astringency as well. Red grapes contain anthocyanin pigments (p. 267),  mainly in the skins. “White” grapes lack anthocyanins; their yellowish color
comes from a different group of phenolic compounds, the flavonols.  •   Aroma compounds, which may be generically grapey, or distinctive of a  particular grape variety. Many aromatics are chemically bound to other  molecules, often sugars, and so aren’t evident in the raw fruit; during  winemaking, fruit and yeast enzymes liberate the aromatics and so make  them available for us to enjoy.  Grape Varieties and Clones   The grapevine evolved with the ability to regenerate  itself and grow vigorously in the spring. It’s easily propagated by cuttings, and  readily lends itself to creating identical versions, or   clones   of a given plant. And it’s  a variable species, one that offers many differences in growth habit, requirements  for water and temperature, and fruit composition. For several millennia, and until  around 1800, grapes were mostly cultivated and made into wine throughout  western Asia and Europe by small groups of people essentially isolated from each  other and living in different environments. So there developed a large number of  distinctive grape varieties, each selected by particular people for characteristics  they found desirable.  Today it’s estimated that there are around 15,000 different varieties of the Eurasian  grape,   Vitis vinifera.   A single variety — Pinot Noir, for example, or Cabernet  Sauvignon — may exist in the form of several hundred different clones, each a  somewhat different version of that variety. Some varieties have very distinctive  aromas; others are more subtle or even anonymous and therefore allow the  aromas of the fermentation and aging more prominence. The term   noble   is applied  to varieties that produce wines with the potential for developing great complexity  over many years in the bottle; these include the French Cabernet Sauvignon, Pinot  Noir, and Chardonnay, the Italian Nebbiolo and Sangiovese, and the German  Riesling.  The Influence of Growing Conditions; Vintage and “ Terroir ”  Pampered Vines Don’t Make the Best Wines   As Pliny observed 2,000 years ago,  “the same vine has a different value in different places.” The quality of grapes, and  of the wine made from them, is influenced by the conditions in which the grapes  grow and mature. To produce a decent wine, the grapes must ripen to an adequate  sweetness, and so the vine must get enough sun, warmth, minerals, and water. On  the other hand, abundant water produces watery fruit, abundant soil nitrogen  produces excess foliage that shades the fruit and gives it odd flavors, and
abundant sun and warmth produce fruit with plenty of sugar but reduced acidity  and aroma compounds, and thus a strong but flat wine.  Vintage Wines   The grapes that make the best wines seem to be produced in a  narrow range of conditions — barely adequate water, minerals and light and heat  — that encourage complete but slow, gradual ripening. Those conditions may or  may not be realized in a given year. Hence the significance for many wines of the  vintage,   the particular year in which the grapes are grown and harvested. Some  years yield better wines than others.  Hybrid and American Wine Grapes  The Eurasian wine grape   Vitis vinifera   has a number of sister species in North  America with which it can breed, and over the centuries plant breeders have  produced a number of different Euro-American hybrids. These were generally  denigrated by European connoisseurs and bureaucrats for their untypical  flavors, but the better of them, and American varieties themselves, are  coming to be appreciated for their own qualities. They include grapes based  on the mainly northeastern   Vitis labrusca   (Concord, floral Catawba,  strawberry-like Ives), midwestern   Vitis aestivalis   (Norton, Cynthiana),  southeastern   Vitis rotundifolia   (floral-citrus Scuppernong), and on complex  parentage (Chambourcin, developed in the Loire region of France).  Terroir   In recent times, much has been said and written about the importance in  winemaking of   terroir : the influence on a wine of the particular place in which the  grapes were grown. The French word includes the entire physical environment of  the vineyard: the soil, its structure and mineral content; the water held in the soil;  the vineyard’s elevation, slope, and orientation; and the microclimate, the regime  of temperature, sunlight, humidity, and rainfall. Each of these aspects can vary over  small distances, from one vineyard to the next; and each can affect the growth of  the vine and the development of its fruit, sometimes in indirect ways. For example,  sloping ground and certain kinds of soil encourage water to drain away from the  roots, and absorb and release the sun’s heat to the vine in different ways. A south-  facing slope can increase the exposure to autumn sunlight by 50% over a planting
on level ground, and thus extend the growing season and accumulation of flavor  compounds.  The wine connoisseur enjoys detecting and marveling at the expression of   terroir  in wines, the palpable differences in the wines made from neighboring vineyards.  The winemaker, on the other hand, generally tries to manage and minimize the  effects of less than ideal   terroirs   and vintages. There’s nothing new about this effort  to make the best of things. The French have been adding sugar to their fermenting  grapes for centuries to compensate for incomplete ripening. What’s new nowadays  is the degree to which the grape composition can be manipulated after harvest, so  that the wine becomes less the product of a particular place and year, and more  the product of modern fermentation technology.  Making Wine  The making of a basic table wine can be divided into three stages. In the first, the  ripe grapes are crushed to free their juice. In the second, the grape juice is  fermented by sugar-consuming, alcohol-producing yeasts into new wine. The third  stage is the aging or maturing of the new wine. This is a period during which the  chemical constituents of the grape and the products of fermentation react with  each other and with oxygen to form a relatively stable ensemble of flavor  molecules.  Crushing Grapes to Make the Must   Crushing extracts from the grape the liquid  that will become wine. This step therefore determines to a large extent the final  wine’s composition and potential qualities.  The substances important to wine quality are not evenly distributed in the grape.  The stems contain bitter-tasting resins and are usually separated from the grapes  as they are crushed. The skin holds much of the fruit’s phenolic compounds, both  pigments and tannins, as well as most of the acid and the many compounds that  give the grape its characteristic aroma. Like the stem, the seeds at the center are  full of tannins, oils, and resins, and care is taken not to break them open during the  pressing.  As a mass of grapes is crushed in a mechanical press, the first juice to come out, the  free run,   is primarily from the middle of the pulp, and is the clearest, purest essence  of the grape, sweet and largely tannin free. As mechanical pressure is applied,  juices from just under the skin and around the seeds augment the free run with a
more complex character. The extent of pressing will have an important influence  on the character of the final wine. The liquid portion, called the   must,   is 70 to 85%  water, 12 to 27% sugars, mainly glucose and fructose, and about 1% acids.  Fruits of the grape vine, Vitis vinifera. The different regions of the grape contain  different proportions of sugar, acid, and other flavor components.  After the Crush   In the case of white wines, the must is left in contact with the skins  for a few hours and removed with gentle pressure before fermentation. It thus  picks up little tannic material or pigmentation. Rosé musts and red wine musts are  partly fermented in contact with the red skins. The longer the must is in contact  with skin and seeds, and the harder it is pressed, the deeper the color (whether  yellow or red) and the more astringent the taste.  Before beginning the fermentation, the winemaker usually adds two substances to  the must. One, sulfur dioxide, suppresses the growth of undesirable wild yeasts  and bacteria, and prevents the oxidation of both flavor and pigment molecules  (the same treatment is given to many dried fruits, and for the same reason).  Though this treatment may sound antiseptically modern, it is centuries old. One of  the natural by-products of fermentation that is increased by sulfuring is sulfites,  sulfur compounds that can induce an allergic reaction in sensitive people.  The second additive is either sugar or acid, and it is used to correct the balance  between these two substances. Grapes that ripen in a cool climate can lack the  sugar to produce enough alcohol for a stable wine; grapes that ripen in a hot  climate metabolize some of their acids and can produce a flat-tasting wine. French  winemakers usually add sugar; California winemakers often add tartaric acid.
The Alcoholic Fermentation  The Fermentation Yeasts   Fermentation can begin with or without the addition of  a starter culture of yeast. The winemaker can choose among many different strains  of   Saccharomyces,   or allow the fermentation to begin spontaneously with “wild”  yeasts from the grape skins (species of   Kloeckera, Candida, Pichia, Hansenula,   and  others). These are always eventually displaced by   Saccharomyces cerevisiae,   which  has a greater tolerance for alcohol, but they do contribute flavor compounds to the  finished wine.  The primary job of the yeast is to convert sugar to alcohol, but it also produces  various volatile, aromatic molecules that the grape itself cannot supply. Prominent  among them are the longer-chain alcohols, and esters, a class of compounds that  combine an acid with an alcohol or phenol. Both yeast and grape enzymes and the  acid conditions also liberate aromatic molecules from the nonvolatile sugar  complexes in which some are stored in the grape, so fermentation also brings out  the grape’s own flavor potential.  Temperatures and Times   The winemaker varies the conditions of fermentation  according to the particular kind of wine being made. In the case of delicate white  wines, the must is fermented for four to six weeks at about 60ºF/16ºC. With more  robust red wines, the must is fermented at a temperature between 65 and  80ºF/18–27ºC in contact with the skins, to extract pigments, tannins, and flavor.  This phase may last for 4 to 14 days (less if heat or a carbon dioxide treatment is  applied). Then the must is separated from the skins and fermented again for a total  of two to three weeks. One of the most critical variables during fermentation is  temperature. The lower the temperature, the slower and longer the fermentation,  and the more aromatic molecules accumulate.  The main fermentation is considered complete when essentially all the sugar in the  must has been converted into alcohol. A wine with no residual sugar is called   dry.  Sweet wines are made by stopping the fermentation before all the sugar has been  consumed, or more commonly, by adding some reserved sweet grape juice to the  dry wine after its yeast has been removed.  Malolactic Fermentation   Winemakers sometimes allow or even induce a second  bacterial fermentation in the new wine after the main yeast fermentation. The  bacterium   Leuconostoc oenos   consumes the wine’s malic acid and converts it into  lactic acid, which is less strong and sour. This “malolactic” fermentation thus
reduces the apparent tartness of the wine. It also produces a number of distinctive  aroma compounds, among them buttery diacetyl. (A relative of   L. oenos, L.  mesenteroides,   contributes the same compound to cultured butter itself!) Some  winemakers   work   to   prevent   a   spontaneous   malolactic   fermentation   from  developing, so that they can retain the sharpness and flavor of the original wine.  Maturation   Once fermentation is complete, the new wine is drained out of the  fermentation tanks to begin the work of clarification and aging, in which the  cloudy, rough-tasting liquid develops into a clear, smooth one.  Racking and Fining   The solid particles of grape and yeasts are cleared from the  wine by the process of racking: letting the yeast cells and other large particles  settle, carefully drawing the wine off the sediment into a new container, and  repeating the process every few months. Interesting exceptions to this rule are  wines intentionally aged for months or even years   sur lie,   or “on the lees,” in contact  with the yeast sediment, whose cells slowly break apart and contribute more flavor  and body to the wine. Champagne and Muscadet are two wines that are aged on  the lees.  The cool racking temperatures — less than 60ºF/16ºC for red wines, around  32ºF/0ºC for whites — reduce the solubility of all the dissolved solids, and cause  the wine to cloud up with a fine precipitate of various complexes of proteins,  carbohydrates, and tannins. Late in the racking procedure, the wine may be   fined :  that is, a substance will be added to the wine that attracts these suspended  particles to itself, and then settles to the bottom, carrying them with it. Gelatin,  egg   white,   bentonite   clay,   and   synthetic   materials   are   used.   Any   particles  remaining in the wine after racking and fining can be removed by passing it  through a centrifuge or filter. Winemakers may choose to limit or omit the fining  and filtration steps, since they remove some flavor and body along with the  undesirable particles.  Barrel Aging   New wine has a raw flavor and a strong, simple, fruity aroma. As the  wine rests after fermentation, a host of chemical reactions slowly proceeds, and  results in the development of balance and complexity in the flavor. If the wine is  being held in a new wood barrel, it also absorbs various substances from the wood  that either provide flavor directly — for example, vanilla-like vanillin and the  coconut-woody oak lactones — or that modify the wine’s own flavor molecules. In  traditional winemaking, the months during which the wine is racked and shifted
from container to container are a time when the wine’s chemical evolution is  directed by periodic exposure to the air. In the presence of oxygen, the tannins,  anthocyanin pigments, and other phenolic compounds react with each other to  form large complexes, so the wine’s astringency and bitterness decline. Some of  the molecules that provide aroma break apart or react with oxygen and each other  to form a new suite of aromas, so fruity, floral notes fade in favor of a more  subdued general “wineyness.” White and light red wines are generally bottled  young, after 6–12 months, with a fairly fresh, fruity bouquet, while astringent dark  reds may require a year or two to develop and smooth out.  Brettanomyces , the Controversial Barrel Yeast  Some wines, including classic reds from Burgundy and Bordeaux, develop  striking and unusual aroma notes suggestive of the barnyard or horse stable.  Oenologists have recently discovered the major source of these aromas to be  a group of yeasts in the genus   Brettanomyces,   which readily colonize wine  barrels. At low levels, their unusual aromas may suggest tobacco leaf; they  also include smoky, medicinal, clove-like, and musty notes (the barnyard  notes come from ethyl phenols and isovaleric and isobutyric acids). Some  wine lovers consider the “brett” aroma a defect caused by contamination and  inadequate winery sanitation, while others appreciate it as an intriguing  contribution to the variety and complexity of wine flavors.  Most wines are made by blending two or more different varieties, and this  important test of the winemaker’s art occurs just before bottling. The final wine  may then be filtered to remove any remaining microbes and haze, and given a final  dose of sulfur dioxide to prevent microbial growth during storage. It may also be  pasteurized. This practice is not limited to inexpensive wines. The Burgundy wines  of Louis Latour are flash-heated for 2–3 seconds at 165ºF/72ºC, a treatment that is  said not to have a detrimental effect on the wine’s continuing flavor development.
Making Wine  Making red and white wines. White wines are fermented at a lower temperature and  without the grape skins and seeds; they’re also clarified at a lower temperature, in  part so that they won’t cloud when served chilled.  Bottle Aging   After a period of a few months to two years in barrels or tanks that  allow controlled contact with oxygen, the wine goes into impermeable glass
bottles. For the last two centuries, the standard stopper for wine bottles has been  cork, which is made from the bark of a species of oak. Because cork can be the  source of off-flavors, some wine producers are now using metal and plastic  stoppers (see box below).  Corks, Cork Taints, Corked Wine  Cork is the outer protective layer of an evergreen oak,   Quercus suber,   that is  native to the western Mediterranean. Where most tree bark is fibrous, cork is  composed of tiny air cells. Nearly 60% of the cell wall in cork is made up of  suberin,   a complex waxy substance similar to the cutin that coats many fruits,  and this makes cork water-resistant and long-lived.  Cork is a natural, organic material, and as such can be infected by molds and  bacteria. Molds produce moldy, earthy, mushroomy, and smoky smells. And  certain bacteria can act on phenolic compounds in the cork and traces of  chlorine disinfectant to produce trichloroanisole, an especially unpleasant  and potent molecule that smells like a dank cellar. It’s estimated that cork  taints spoil from 1 to 5 percent of the wine bottles stoppered with cork. The  problem of “corked” wine has led wine producers to experiment with  alternative stoppers, including metal caps and stoppers made from foamed  plastic.  Wine continues to be affected by oxidation long after it leaves the cask. It picks up  some air when it is filled into the bottle, and the bottle is sealed with a small space  between wine and cork. So while oxidation is greatly slowed in the bottle, it does  continue, though it may be outweighed by a different set of reactions, “reductive”  rather than oxidative. The chemical changes that occur are not well understood,  but include the ongoing liberation of aromatic molecules from nonaromatic  complexes, and aggregation reactions among tannins and pigments that further  lower astringency and cause a shift in pigment hues, usually toward the brown.  White wines and light-red rosés benefit from about a year of bottle aging, during  which time the aroma develops and the amount of free, odorous sulfur dioxide  decreases. Many red wines improve greatly after a year or two in the bottle, and
some may develop for decades. All wines have a finite life span, and their quality  eventually declines. White wines develop overtones of honey, hay, wood, and  chemical solvents; red wines lose much of their aroma and become flat-tasting and  more plainly and harshly alcoholic.  Special Wines  In the last few pages, I’ve described the general method for making dry table  wines, which usually accompany meals. Sparkling, sweet, and fortified wines are  often sipped on their own. Here is a brief account of their special qualities and how  they are produced.  Sparkling Wines: Champagne and Others   Sparkling wines delight by emitting  bubbles that catch the light and prick the tongue. The bubbles come from the  wine’s considerable dissolved reserves of carbon dioxide gas, a by-product of yeast  metabolism that ordinarily escapes into the air from the surface of the fermenting  wine. To make a sparkling wine, the wine is confined under pressure — either in  the bottle or in special tanks — so that the carbon dioxide can’t escape as it’s  produced, and instead comes to saturate the liquid. A bottle of Champagne holds  a gas pressure of 3–4 atmospheres, somewhat higher than the pressure in car tires,  and contains about six times its volume in carbon dioxide!  When we remove the cork and thus relieve the pressure, the excess carbon dioxide  leaves the solution in the form of gas bubbles. The bubbles form wherever the  liquid comes into contact with a microscopic air pocket into which the dissolved  carbon dioxide can diffuse. In the glass, the bubbles form on scratches and other  surface imperfections. The refreshingly sharp prickle in the mouth comes from the  irritating dose of carbonic acid that the bubbles deliver as they redissolve into the  unsaturated layer of saliva.  Many countries have their own versions of sparking wine, which range from the  carefully crafted to the mass-produced. The best-known example of a sparkling  wine is Champagne, which strictly speaking is the wine made in the region of that  name east of Paris, and accounts for less than a tenth of the world’s production of  sparkling wine. From the late 17th century to the late 19th, Champagne evolved to  become the most refined expression of this style. The French invented the method  of inducing a bubble-making second fermentation in the bottle, and this   méthode  champenoise   has become a worldwide benchmark for making fine sparkling wines.
Enjoying Sparkling Wines  In order to appreciate their sparkle, sparkling wines are best served very cold,  around 40ºF/5ºC, in tall, narrow glasses that allow their rising bubbles to be  admired for several seconds. Carbon dioxide is more soluble in water at low  temperatures, so the bubbles will be smaller and longer-lasting in cold wine.  Because soaps, fats, and oils cause bubbles to collapse (p. 639), bubbliness is  reduced when our lips deposit lipstick or oils from food on the glass, or when  the glass has been incompletely rinsed and carries traces of dish soap.  Making Champagne   The first stage in making Champagne is to produce a base  wine, which is made primarily from Pinot Noir and/or Chardonnay grapes. Next  comes the secondary fermentation, which must be carried out in a closed  container in order to retain the gas. Sugar is added to the dry base wine as food for  the yeast. The wine, sugar, and yeast are put into individual bottles, corked,  clamped, and kept at about 55ºF/13ºC.  Though the secondary fermentation is usually complete after about two months,  the wine is left to age in contact with the yeast sediment for anywhere from a few  months to several years. During this time, most of the yeast cells die, fall apart, and  release their contents into the wine, giving it a distinctive, complex flavor with  toasted, roasted, nutty, coffee, even meaty notes (due in large part to complex  sulfur compounds). In addition to flavor, yeast proteins and carbohydrates will  stabilize bubbles when they form in the glass, and help produce the very fine  bubbles typical of Champagne. After aging on the yeast, the sediment is removed  and the bottle topped off with additional wine, and finished with a small amount  of aged wine mixed with sugar and brandy. The bottle is then recorked.  Making Other Sparkling Wines   The traditional Champagne process is labor  intensive, time consuming, and expensive. More affordable and less complex  sparkling wines are made all over the world in a number of different ways. One is  simply to minimize or eliminate aging on the yeast sediment. Others involve  fermenting the base wine for the second time not in individual bottles, but in large  tanks, or not fermenting again at all: the cheapest sparkling wines are simply  carbonated as soft drinks are, with tanks of pressurized carbon dioxide.
Sweet Wines   Table wines are generally fermented until they are   dry : that is, until  the yeast consumes essentially all the grape’s sugars and converts them into  alcohol. Sweet or dessert wines with 10–20% “residual” sugar are made in several  different ways:  •   An ordinary dry wine is sweetened with some unfermented grape juice, and  the combination treated to prevent further fermentation with a dose of  sulfur dioxide, or filtration that removes all yeast and bacteria from the wine.  •   Grapes are dried on the vine or after picking to concentrate their sugars to  35% or more of the grape weight. This leaves residual sugar in the wine  when the yeasts reach their maximum alcohol level and the fermentation  stops. German   Trockenbeerenauslese   and Italian   recioto   wines are examples.  •   Grapes are left on the vine past the first frost and picked when frozen (or  frozen artificially), and then gently pressed while cold to separate the  concentrated juice from the ice crystals. The concentrated juice ferments  into a stable wine with residual sugar. German   Eiswein   dates from around  1800.  •   The grapes are allowed to become infected with “noble rot,” the mold  Botrytis cinerea,   which dehydrates the grapes, concentrates their sugars, and  transforms their flavor and consistency. This method originated in the Tokaji  region of Hungary around 1650, and was adopted in the German Rheingau  by 1750 and in the Sauternes region of Bordeaux around 1800.  The Noble Rot: Tokaji, Sauternes, and Others   The noble rot (French   pourriture  noble,   German   Edelfäule ) Botrytis cinerea   is also known as bunch rot, and it is mainly  a destructive disease of grapes and other fruits. It becomes noble only in the right  climatic conditions, when the initial infection in humid weather is followed by a  dry period that limits the infection. In this situation, the mold does several useful  things. It perforates the skin of the grape, thus allowing it to lose moisture and  become concentrated during the subsequent dry period; it metabolizes some of  the tartaric acid at the same time that it consumes some of the grape’s sugars, so  the balance between sweetness and acidity doesn’t suffer; it produces glycerol,  which lends the eventual wine an incomparably dense body; and it synthesizes a  number of pleasing aroma compounds, notably the maple-sugar-like sotolon,  mushroomy octenol, and a number of terpenes. The honeyed flavor of these wines  can develop in the bottle for decades.  Fortified Wines   Fortified   wines are so called because the strength of the base wine
is boosted by the addition of distilled spirits to 18–20% alcohol, a level that  prevents spoilage by vinegar bacteria and other microbes. Fortification appears to  have begun in the sherry-producing region of Spain sometime before 1600.  Winemakers take advantage of the stability of fortified wines by exposing them to  the air for months or years. They thus make a virtue of the normally undesirable  oxidative changes in flavor that come with keeping leftover wine. Most fortified  wines keep well for weeks in an opened bottle or decanter.  Madeira   Beginning in the 15th century, Portuguese ships embarking on long  voyages to the Indies would pick up barrels of ordinary wine on the Portuguese  island of Madeira. Sailors and producers soon found that the long barrel aging in  extreme temperatures and with constant agitation produced an unusual but  attractive wine. By 1700, ships were sailing to the East Indies and back just to age  the barrels of Madeira stored on board; by 1800, the wine was being fortified with  brandy and hot-aged on the island. Today, the base wine, which can be white or  red, is fortified, sometimes sweetened, then artificially heated to a temperature  around 120ºF/50ºC, where it’s held for three months before slowly cooling down  again. It’s then aged in barrels in a sherry-like   solera   system (below) before  bottling. There are several different styles of Madeira, from sweet to nearly dry.  Port   The name   port   was originally the English term for any Portuguese wine. The  addition of brandy was introduced in the 18th century as a way of guaranteeing  that the wines would get to England in drinkable condition, and it resulted in the  development of an unusual group of sweet red wines. Port is made by stopping  the fermentation of the base red wine while about half the grape sugar is left, and  fortifying it with distilled spirits to give an alcohol content around 20%. The wine is  then aged in barrel and finally in bottle for anywhere from two to 50 years. Older  ports are characterized by the maple-like compound sotolon and other sweetly  aromatic compounds, likely products of browning reactions, which are also found  in botrytized wines and sherries.  Styles of Port  Today there are several distinct styles of port, the most common of which are  these:
•   Vintage port is made from the best grapes in especially good years, and  is barrel-aged for two years and bottle-aged unfiltered for a minimum  of 10 years, often many decades longer. It’s dark and fruity, must be  decanted off its considerable sediment, and must be drunk within a few  days after the bottle is opened.  •   Tawny port, so named for its brown color (the result of precipitation of  the red pigments), is typically barrel-aged for 10 years before being  filtered and bottled. It is much more oxidized than vintage port of the  same age, and can be kept in an opened bottle or decanter for weeks.  •   Ruby port is an intermediate product, aged for three years in barrels  before filtration and bottling.  Sherry   Sherry is a fortified, oxidized white wine that was developed in the Spanish  port city Jerez de la Frontera, whose name was Anglicized to “sherry” around 1600.  True sherry gets its distinctive flavor from the   solera   system of maturing wine,  which was developed early in the 19th century. The solera is a series of casks, each  initially containing the fortified new wine of a particular year, but not completely  filled, so a significant area of wine surface is in direct contact with the air. The wine  therefore develops a characteristic intense, oxidized flavor. As the cask contents  evaporate and become more concentrated, each is replenished with wine from the  next younger cask. The final wine is bottled from the casks containing the oldest  wines, and thus is a blend of wines from many different vintages and degrees of  development.  There are a variety of rapid industrial methods for making sherry-like wines. The  fortified base wines may be heated to develop the flavor, or cultured with a  “submerged flor”: the wine and flor yeasts (see box) are kept in large tanks and  agitated and aerated.  Styles of Sherry  True sherry from the Jerez region of Spain is made in several different ways to
produce different styles of wine.  •   Fino   is the lightest, least fortified, and least oxidized. Its surface in the  solera is protected from the air by a layer of unusual yeasts called the  flor .  •   Amontillado   is essentially   fino   sherry that did not develop or retain a   flor  in the solera, and so is more oxidized, darker, and heavier.  •   Oloroso   sherries (from the Spanish for “fragrant,”   “perfumed”) are made  from heavier, more strongly fortified base wines that don’t develop a  flor , reach 24% alcohol, and become dark brown and concentrated.  Vermouth   Modern-day vermouth derives from a medicinal wine made in 18th-  century   Italy,   which   the   Germans   named   Vermut   after   its   main   ingredient,  wormwood (see box, p. 771). Today it’s essentially a flavored wine fortified to about  18% alcohol, used mainly in mixed drinks and in cooking. Vermouth is made in  both Italy and France from a neutral white wine flavored with dozens of herbs and  spices, and sometimes sweetened (up to 16% sugar). The French usually extract  the flavorings in the wine itself, while the Italians extract or co-distill them with the  fortification alcohol. Once fortified, the wine is aged for several months.  Storing and Serving Wine  Wine Storage   Wines are sensitive liquids, and require some care in order to keep  well and even improve during storage. They’re best kept in some version of the  traditional cellar: a moderately humid, dark, cool place. Bottles are stored on their  sides, so that the wine wets the cork and prevents it from drying out, shrinking,  and allowing air in. Moderate humidity keeps the outer portion of the cork from  shrinking, and constant temperature prevents volume and pressure changes in the  liquid and air inside the bottle, which can cause air and wine movement in the  space between bottle and cork. Darkness minimizes the penetration of high-  energy light into sparkling and other white wines, where it can cause a sulfury off-  aroma similar to that found in light-struck beer and milk (pp. 749, 21). And low  temperatures, between 50 and 60ºF/10–15ºC, slow the wine’s development, so  that it remains complex and interesting for the longest possible time.
Serving Temperatures   Different kinds of wine taste their best at different serving  temperatures. The colder a wine, the less tart, sweet, and aromatic it seems.  Intrinsically tart and mildly aromatic wines, usually light white and rosé wines, are  best served cold, 42–55ºF/5–13ºC. Less tart, more aromatic red wines are more full-  flavored at 60–68ºF/16–20ºC. The strongly alcoholic, richly aromatic port is said to  taste best at 65–72ºF/18–22ºC. Complex white wines may be served at higher  temperatures than their light cousins; similarly, many light red wines are better at  cooler temperatures.  “Breathing” and Aeration   Wines can sometimes be improved just before serving  by a period of aeration or “breathing.” Such a treatment allows volatile substances  in the wine to escape into the air, and it allows oxygen from the air to enter the  wine, where it reacts with volatile and other molecules and changes the wine’s  aroma. No significant aeration occurs when a wine is simply uncorked and left to  sit in the open bottle. The most effective way to aerate a wine is to pour it, and into  a broad, shallow decanter that continues to expose a large surface area to the air.  Aeration can improve a wine’s aroma by accelerating the escape of some off-odors  (for example, excess sulfur dioxide in some white wines), and by providing a kind  of accelerated aging to young, undeveloped red wines. But it allows desirable  aromas to escape as well, and can undo the complexity of a mature wine that has  developed slowly over years in the bottle.  Wine also absorbs oxygen when it’s poured into the glass and as it rests there, and  its aroma often evolves noticeably between the first sip and the last. To discover  this dynamic quality and follow its course is one of the pleasures of drinking wine.  The Alcohol Content of Wines  In the United States, the approximate alcohol content of a wine is listed on its  label. There is a total of 3% leeway allowed, so a wine labeled as containing  12% alcohol by volume may contain anywhere from 10.5% to 13.5%.  Keeping Leftovers   The key to preserving the quality of leftover wine is to  minimize chemical change. Lowering the wine’s temperature slows all chemical  activity, and simple refrigeration works well for white wines, which usually keep
well simply by being recorked and refrigerated. However, chilling causes dissolved  substances in more complex red wines to precipitate into solid particles, and this  causes irreversible changes in flavor. Leftover red wine is best handled by a  minimizing its exposure to flavor-altering oxygen, which can be done by means of  inexpensive devices that pull the air out of a partly empty bottle, or by replacing  the air with inert nitrogen gas, or by gently pouring a partial bottle into smaller  bottles that can be filled all the way to the top — though the act of pouring itself  introduces some air into the wine.  Enjoying Wine  For those who love it, wine can be endlessly fascinating. The varieties of grape, the  place they were grown in, the weather that year, the yeasts that ferment them, the  skills of the winemaker in handling them, the years they spend in oak or in glass: all  these factors and more affect what we taste in a sip of wine. And there’s a lot to  taste in that sip, because wine has one of the most complex flavors of all our foods.  Wine connoisseurs have developed an elaborate vocabulary to try to capture and  describe these fugitive sensations, one that may seem forbiddingly complicated  and fanciful. Many of us most of the time would be content with the five   F ’s  proposed 800 years ago in the Regimen of Health for the School of Salerno:  Si bona vina cupis, quinque haec laudantur in illis:  Fortia, formosa, et fragrantia, frigida, frisca.  If you desire good wines, these five things are praised in them:  Strength, beauty, and fragrance, coolness, freshness.  On the other hand, we can learn to taste much more in a sip of wine, and get more  pleasure from it, if we know something about what’s in that sip, about the kinds of  substances that can and do contribute to the flavor of wine (see box, p. 738).  Clarity and Color   The appearance of a wine can give some important clues about  how it will taste. If the wine is cloudy and the particles don’t settle with a few hours’  standing, it has probably undergone an unintended bacterial fermentation in the  bottle, and its flavor is likely to be off. Tiny crystals (which   do   settle) are usually salts  of excess tartaric or oxalic acid, and are not signs of spoilage; in fact they indicate a  good level of acidity. “White” wines actually range in color from straw yellow to  deep amber. The darker the color, the older the wine — the yellow pigments turn
brownish when oxidized — and the more mature the flavor. Most red wines retain  a deep, ruby-like color for some years, along with a fruity character in the flavor. As  they age, the anthocyanin pigments complex with some of the tannins and  precipitate, leaving more of the brownish tannins visible. The wine develops an  amber or tawny tint, which goes along with its less fruity, more complex flavor.  Feeling and Taste in the Mouth   When we experience a sip of wine in the mouth,  the senses of both touch and taste come into play.  Astringency   The   feel   of a wine is largely a matter of its astringency and viscosity.  Astringency — the word comes from the Latin for “to bind together” — is the  sensation we have when the tannins in wine “tan” the lubricating proteins in our  saliva the way they do leather: they cross-link the proteins and form little  aggregates that make the saliva feel rough rather than slick. This dry, constricting  feeling, together with the smoothness and viscosity caused by the presence of  alcohol and other extracted components, and in sweet wines sugar, create the  impression of the wine’s body, of substance and volume. In strong young red  wines, the tannins can be palpable enough that “chewy” seems a good description.  In excess, they are drying and harsh.  Taste   The   taste   of a wine is mostly a matter of its sourness, or a balance between  sour and sweet, and a savory quality that has been attributed to succinic acid and  other   products   of   yeast   metabolism.   Phenolic   compounds   can   sometimes  contribute a slight bitterness. The acid content of a wine is important in preventing  it from tasting bland or flat; it’s sometimes said to provide the “backbone” for the  wine’s overall flavor. White wines are usually around 0.85% acid, red wines 0.55%.  Wines that are fermented dry, with no residual sugar, may still have a slight  sweetness thanks to the alcohol and glycerol, a sugar-like molecule produced by  the yeasts. Fructose and glucose are the predominant sugars in grapes, and they  begin to provide a noticeable sweetness when left in wines at levels around 1%.  Sweet dessert wines may contain more than 10% sugars. In strong wines, alcohol  itself can dominate other sensations with its pungent harshness.  Wine Aroma   If acidity is the backbone of a wine, viscosity and astringency its  body, then aroma is its life, its animating spirit. Though they account for only about  one part in a thousand of wine’s weight, the volatile molecules that can escape the  liquid and ascend into the nose are what fill out its flavor, and make wine much  more than tart alcoholic water.
Some Aromas and Molecules in Wines  Here are examples of the molecules and aromas that chemists have found in  wines and that contribute significantly to wine flavor.  Aroma Quality   Wine   Chemical  Fruits: Apple, pear   Many wines   Ethyl esters  Banana, pineapple   Many wines   Acetate esters  Strawberry   Concord grape wine   Furaneol  Guava, grapefruit,  passion fruit  Sauvignon Blanc,  Champagne  Sulfur compounds  Citrus fruits   Riesling, Muscat   Terpenes  Apple   Sherries   Acetaldehyde  Flowers: Violets   Pinot Noir, Cabernet  Sauvignon  Ionone  Citrus, lavender   Muscat   Linalool  Rose   Gewürtztraminer   Geraniol  Rose   Sake   Phenethyl alcohol  Rose, Citrus   Riesling   Nerol  Wood: Oak   Barrel-aged wines   Lactones  Nuts: Almond   Barrel-aged wines   Benzaldehyde  Vegetables: Bell  pepper, green peas  Cabernet Sauvignon,  Sauvignon Blanc  Methoxyisobutylpyrazines  Grass, tea   Many wines   Norisoprenoids  Asparagus, cooked  vegetables  Many wines   Dimethyl sulfide  Spices: Vanilla   Barrel-aged wines   Vanillin  Clove   Barrel-aged red wines   Ethyl, vinyl guaiacol  Tobacco   Barrel-aged red wines   Ethyl, vinyl guaiacol
Aroma Quality   Wine   Chemical  Earthiness:  Mushrooms  Botrytized wines   Octenol  Stone   Cabernet Sauvignon,  Sauvignon Blanc  Sulfur compound  Smoke, Tar   Many red wines   Ethyl phenol, ethyl guaiacol,  vinyl guaiacol  Sweet, caramel:  Maple syrup,  fenugreek  Sherry, port   Sotolon  Butter   Many white wines   Diacetyl  Roasted: Coffee,  toasted brioche  Champagne   Sulfur compounds  Grilled meats   Sauvignon Blanc   Sulfur compounds  Animals: Leather,  horse, stable  Many red wines   Ethyl phenol, ethyl guaiacol,  vinyl guaiacol  Cat   Sauvignon Blanc   Sulfur compounds  Solvent: Kerosene   Riesling   TDN ( trimethyl-dihydro-  naphthalene )  Nail polish remover   Many wines   Ethyl acetate  An Ever-Changing Microcosm   A given wine contains several hundred different  kinds of volatile molecules, and those molecules have many different kinds of  odors. In fact they run the gamut of our olfactory world. Some of the same  molecules are also found in temperate and tropical fruits, flowers, leaves, wood,  spices, animal scents, cooked foods of all kinds, even fuel tanks and nail polish  remover. That’s why wine can be so evocative and yet so hard to describe: at its  best, it offers a kind of sensory microcosm. And that little world of molecules is a  dynamic one. It evolves over months and years in the bottle, by the minute in the  glass, and in the mouth with every passing second. The vocabulary of wine tasting  thus amounts to a catalogue of things in the world that can be smelled, and whose
smell can be recognized, however fleetingly, in an attentive sip.  A few of the aromatic substances in wine are contributed directly by particular  varieties of grape, mainly the flowery terpenes of some white grapes and unusual  sulfur compounds in the Cabernet Sauvignon family. But the primary creators of  wine aroma are the yeasts, which apparently generate most of the volatile  molecules as incidental by-products of their metabolism and growth. The yeasts  and 400 generations of winemakers, who noticed and cultivated those incidental  pleasures, made a tart alcoholic liquid into something much more stimulating.  Beer  Wine and beer are made from very different raw materials: wine from fruits, beer  from grains, usually barley. Unlike grapes, which accumulate sugars in order to  attract animals, the grains are filled with starch to provide energy for the growing  embryo and seedling. Yeasts can’t exploit starch directly, and this means that  before they can be fermented, grains must be treated to break down their starch to  sugars. While it’s true that grapes are much more easily fermented — yeasts begin  to flourish in the sweet juice as soon as they break open — grain has several  advantages as a material for producing alcohol. It’s quicker and easier to grow than  the grapevine, much more productive in a given acreage, can be stored for many  months before being fermented, and it can be made into beer any day of the year,  not just at harvest time. Of course grains bring a very different flavor to beer than  grapes do to wine; it’s the flavor of the grasses, of bread, and of cooking, which is  essential to the beer-making process.  The Evolution of Beer  Three Ways to Sweeten Starchy Grains   Our ingenious prehistoric ancestors  discovered no fewer than three different ways to turn grains into alcohol! The key  to each was enzymes that convert the grain starch into fermentable sugars.  Because every enzyme molecule can do its starch-splitting operation perhaps a  million times, a small quantity of the enzyme source can digest a large quantity of  starch into fermentable sugars. Inca women found the enzymes in their own saliva:  they made   chicha   by chewing on ground corn, then mixing that corn with cooked  corn. In the Far East, brewers found the enzymes in a mold,   Aspergillus oryzae,  which readily grew on cooked rice (p. 754). This preparation, called the   chhü   in
China,   koji   in Japan, was then mixed with a fresh batch of cooked rice. In the Near  East, the grain itself supplied the enzyme. Brewers soaked the grain in water and  allowed it to germinate for several days, then heated the ground seedling with  ungerminated grain. This technique, called   malting,   is the one most widely used  today to make beer.  Beer in Ancient Times   Malting is much like the making of sprouts from beans and  other seeds, and may have begun in the sprouting of grains simply to make them  softer, moister, and sweeter. There’s clear evidence that barley and wheat beers  were being brewed in Egypt, Babylon, and Sumeria by the third millennium   BCE ,  and that somewhere between a third and half of the barley crop in Mesopotamia  was reserved for brewing. We know that brewers preserved the malted grain, or  malt, by baking it into a flat bread, then soaked the bread in water to make beer.  The knowledge of beer making seems to have passed from the Middle East  through western Europe to the north, where in a climate too cold for the vine, beer  became the usual beverage. (Among the nomadic tribes of northern Europe and  central Asia who did not even cultivate grain, milk was fermented into the drinks  called   kefir   and   koumiss. ) To this day, beer remains the national beverage of  Germany, Belgium, Holland, and Britain.  Wherever both have been available, beer has been the drink of the common  people and wine the drink of the rich. The raw material for beer, grain, is cheaper  than grapes and its fermentation is less tricky and drawn out. To the Greeks and  Romans, beer remained an imitation wine made by barbarians who did not  cultivate the grape. Pliny described it as a cunning if unnatural invention:  The nations of the West also have their own intoxicant, made from grain  soaked in water. There are a number of ways of making it in the various  provinces of Gaul and Spain…. Alas, what wonderful ingenuity vice  possesses! A method has actually been discovered for making even water  intoxicated.
Some Beer-like Brewed Drinks  This chapter concentrates on standard beers brewed with barley malt, but  there are many other ways to make an alcoholic drink from starchy foods.  Here are a few examples.  Name of Drink   Region   Main Ingredient  Chicha   South America   Boiled maize, chewed to contribute  saliva enzymes  Manioc beer   South America and  elsewhere  Boiled manioc root, chewed to  contribute saliva enzymes  Millet, sorghum,  rice beers  Africa, Asia   Millet, sorghum, rice  Boza/bouza   Southwest Asia,  North Africa  Bread made from malted millet,  wheat  Pombe ya ndizi   Kenya   Bananas and malted millet  Kvass   Russia   Rye bread  Roggenbier   Germany   Malted rye  Germany: Hops and Lagering   In the centuries following the fall of Rome, beer  continued to be an important beverage in much of Europe. Monasteries brewed it  for themselves and for nearby settlements. By the 9th century, alehouses had  become common in England, with individual keepers brewing their own. Until  1200, the English government considered ale to be a food, and did not tax it.  It was in medieval Germany that two great innovations made beer largely what it is  today: brewers preserved and flavored it with hops, and began to ferment it slowly  in the cold to make mild-flavored   lager.  Hops   The earliest brewers probably added herbs and spices to beer, both to give it  flavor and to delay the development of off-flavors from oxidation and the growth  of spoilage microbes. In early Europe this mixture, called   gruit   in German, included  bog-myrtle, rosemary, yarrow, and other herbs. Coriander was also sometimes  used, juniper in Norway, and sweet gale ( Myrica gale ) especially in Denmark and
Scandinavia. It was around 900 that hops, the resinous cones of the vine   Humulus  lupulus,   a relative of marijuana, came into use in Bavaria. Thanks to its pleasant  taste and effectiveness in delaying spoilage, it had largely replaced   gruit   and other  herbs by the end of the 14th century. In 1574, Reginald Scot noted in   A Perfite  Platforme of a Hoppe Garden   that the advantages of hops were overwhelming: “If  your ale may endure a fortnight, your beer through the benefit of the hops, shall  continue a month, and what grace it yieldeth to the taste, all men may judge that  have sense in their mouths.” Still, it was not until about 1700 that English ale was  hopped as a matter of course.  Lager   From the times of Egypt and Sumeria to the Middle Ages, brewers made  beer without much control over the temperature of fermentation, and with yeasts  that grew at the surface of the liquid. The beer fermented in a few days, and it was  consumed within days or weeks. Sometime around 1400, in the foothills of the  Bavarian Alps, there evolved a new kind of beer. It was fermented in cool caves  over the period of a week or more, and with a special yeast that grew below the  surface of the liquid. Then it was packed in ice for several months before it was  drawn off the yeast sediment for drinking. The cool, slow fermentation gave the  beer a distinctive, relatively mild flavor, and the cold temperature and long settling  time produced a sparkling-clear appearance. This   lager   beer (from the German  lagern,   “to store,”   “to lay down”) remained distinctly Bavarian until the 1840s, when  the   special   yeast   and   techniques   were   taken   to   Pilsen,   Czechoslovakia,   to  Copenhagen, and to the United States, and became the prototype of most modern  beers. England and Belgium are the only major producers that still brew most of  their beer in the original way, at warm temperatures and with top-fermenting  yeasts.  England: Bottles and Bubbles, Specialty Malts   The English were late to accept  hops, but pioneered in the making of bottled beer. Ordinary ale — the original  English word for beer — was fermented in an open tank, and like wine it lost all its  carbon dioxide to the air: the bubbles simply rose to the surface and burst. Some  residual yeast might grow while the liquid was stored in a barrel, but it would lose  its light gassiness as soon as the barrel was tapped. Sometime around 1600, it was  discovered that ale kept in a corked bottle would become bubbly. Quite early on,  the discovery was attributed to Alexander Nowell, dean of St. Paul’s Cathedral.  Thomas Fuller, in his 1662   History of the Worthies of England,   wrote:
Without offense it may be remembered, that leaving a bottle of ale, when  fishing, in the grass, [Nowell] found it some days after, no bottle, but a gun,  such the sound at the opening thereof: and this is believed (casualty is  mother of more invention than industry) the original of bottled ale in  England.  By 1700, glass-bottled ale sealed with cork and thread had become popular, along  with sparkling Champagne (p. 724). But both were largely novelties. Most beer was  drunk flat, or close to it, from barrels. Centuries later, with the development of  airtight kegs, of carbonation, and the increasing tendency to drink beer at home  instead of at the tavern, bubbly beer became the rule.  Food Words:   Malt  Our ancestors probably began soaking and sprouting grains because it was  an easy way to make them soft enough to eat as is, and quicker to cook. In  fact our word for soaked, partly sprouted cereal grain comes from an Indo-  European root meaning “soft.”   Words that are related to   malt   include   melt,  mollusc   (p. 226), and   mollify.  Specialty Malts   The 18th and 19th centuries were an innovative time in Britain,  and it was early in this period that many of today’s familiar British brewing names  — Bass, Guinness, and others — got their start. By 1750, the greater control that  coke and coal heat gave the maltster made gently dried pale malts possible, and  thereby pale ales. And in 1817, “patent malt” was developed. This was malted  barley roasted very dark, and used in small amounts only to adjust the color and  flavor of ales and beers, not to provide fermentable sugars. Patent and pale malts  made it possible to produce a range of dark beers with a combination of light,  largely fermentable malt and very dark coloring malt. This was the beginning of  porter and stout as we know them today: darker and heavier than ordinary brews,  but much lighter and less caloric than they were 200 years ago.  Beer in America   The U.S. preference for light, even characterless brews would  seem to be the result of climate and history. Heavy beer is less refreshing when the
summers get as hot as ours do. And the original British colonists seem to have  been more interested in making whiskey than beer (p. 760). We had no strong  national tradition in the matter of beer, so the way was clear for later German  immigrants to set the taste around 1840, when someone — perhaps one John  Wagner near Philadelphia — introduced the newly available lager yeast and  technique, and the distinctive brew caught on.  Both Milwaukee and St. Louis quickly became centers of lager brewing: in the  former, Pabst, Miller, and Schlitz; in the latter, Anheuser and Busch; and Stroh in  Detroit all got their starts in the 1850s and 1860s, and Coors in Denver in the  1870s. Several of these names and their light, Pilsner-style beers remain dominant  today, while the stronger traditional brews of England and Germany appeal to a  relatively small number of beer lovers. The only indigenous American style of beer  is “steam beer,” a rare relic of the California Gold Rush. Without the large supply of  ice necessary to make lager beer, San Francisco brewers used the yeast and  techniques   appropriate   to   cool   bottom   fermentation,   but   brewed   at   top-  fermentation temperatures. The result: a full-flavored and gassy beer that gave off  a lot of foam when the keg was tapped.  Food Words:   Ale   and   Beer ;   Brew  The original English word for a fermented barley drink was not   beer,   but   ale.   It  apparently derives from the effects of alcohol; the Indo-European root of   ale  had to do with intoxication, magic, and sorcery, and may be related to a root  meaning “to wander, to be in exile.”   The alternative name,   beer,   comes via  Latin from a much more prosaic connection: its root is the word for “to drink.”  Brew   is related to   bread, broil, braise,   and   ferment ; they all come from an Indo-  European root meaning “to boil, to bubble, to effervesce.”  Beer Today   Today, the countries with the largest per capita consumption of beer  are mainly traditional European beer producers: Germany, the Czech Republic,  Belgium, and Britain and its former colony Australia. In the United States, beer  accounts for more than three quarters of the alcoholic drinks consumed. Most  American beer remains bland and uniform, produced by a handful of large
companies in largely automated factory-like breweries. The 1970s brought a revival  of interest in more flavorful alternatives, and a flourishing of “microbreweries”  making specialty beers in small quantities, brewpubs that both brew and serve  beer, and home brewing. Some of these small enterprises have grown with their  success, and the giant brewers are now making microbrew lookalikes. And it’s now  possible to find beers from all over the world in liquor stores and supermarkets.  These are good times for exploring the many different styles of beer and ale.  Brewing Ingredients: Malt  Beer begins with barley. Other grains — oats, wheat, corn, millet, sorghum — have  also been used, but barley has become the grain of choice because it’s the best at  generating starch-digesting enzymes.  Four stages in the malting process. As the barley kernel germinates, it generates  digestive enzymes, weakens cell walls, and begins the process of converting starch  into fermentable sugars. The shading indicates the progress of cell-wall weakening  and starch digestion. Malting is stopped when the growing shoot just reaches the tip  of the kernel.  Malting   The first step in converting barley grain into malt is to steep the dry grain  in cool water and then allow it to germinate for several days at around 65ºF/18ºC.  The embryo restarts its biochemical machinery and produces various enzymes,  including some that break down the barley cell walls, and others that break down  the starch and proteins inside the cells of the food-storage tissue, the endosperm.  These enzymes then diffuse from the embryo into the endosperm, where they
work together to dissolve away the cell walls, penetrate the cells, and digest some  of the starch granules and protein bodies inside. The embryo also secretes the  hormone gibberellin, which stimulates the aleurone cells to produce digestive  enzymes as well.  The maltster’s aim is to maximize the breakdown of the endosperm cell walls and  the grain’s production of starch-and protein-digesting enzymes. The cell walls have  been adequately weakened by the time that the growing tip of the embryo  reaches the end of the kernel, some five to nine days after the grain is first soaked.  If the maltster is going to make a pale malt, then he keeps starch digestion to a  minimum and malts for a shorter time; for a darker malt that will benefit from more  sugars for the browning reactions, he malts for a longer time, and may finish by  holding the moist barley at 140–180ºF/60–80ºC to maximize the action of the  starch-digesting, sugar-producing enzymes.  Kilning   Once the barley reaches the desired balance of enzymes and sugars, the  maltster fixes that balance by drying and heating it in a kiln. The dehydration and  heat kill the embryo, and they also generate color and flavor. To make malts with  high enzyme activities, the maltster dries the barley gently, over about 24 hours,  and brings the temperature slowly up to around 180ºF/80ºC. Such a malt is pale,  and makes a light-colored, light-flavored brew. To make malts that have little  enzyme activity but are rich in color and flavor, he kilns the barley at a high  temperature, 300–360ºF/150–180ºC, to encourage browning reactions. Dark malts  develop flavors that range from toasted to caramelized to sharp, astringent, and  smoky. Brewers have many different kinds of malt to choose from — their names  include pale or lager, ale, crystal, amber, brown, caramel, chocolate, and black —  and often mix two or more malts in a single brew to obtain a particular  combination of flavor, color, and enzyme power.  Once the malt has been kilned, the dried kernels can be stored for several months  until they’re needed, when they’re ground into a coarse powder. They’re also made  into malt extracts for both commercial and home brewers: the malted barley is  soaked in hot water to remove its carbohydrates, enzymes, color, and flavor, and  the liquid then concentrated to a syrup or a dry powder (p. 679).  Brewing Ingredients: Hops  Hops are the female flowers, or “cones,” of a Eurasian-American vine,   Humulus
lupulus,   which bear small resin and aromatic oil glands near the base of their floral  leaves, or bracts. They are an essential flavoring ingredient in beers. There are now  several dozen brewing varieties, most of them European or European-American  hybrids. Hops are picked off the plant when mature, dried, sometimes powdered  and formed into pellets, and then stored until needed. They’re added to the brew  liquid at the rate of about 0.5 to 5 grams per quart/liter, with the low figure typical  of bland commercial brews, the high figure of flavorful microbrews and traditional  Pilsners.  The hop vine, Humulus lupulus, and its female flower structure, the cone, with a close-  up of one of the cone’s clustered leaves, or bracts.  Bitterness and Aroma   Hops provide two different elements: bitterness from  phenolic “alpha acids” in their resins, and aroma from their essential oil. Some hop  varieties contribute a dependable level of bitterness, while others are prized for  their aroma. The important bittering compounds are the alpha acids humulone  and lupulone. In their native form they’re not very soluble in water, but prolonged  boiling transforms them into soluble structures that flavor the beer effectively.  (Brewers sometimes use hop extracts that have been pretreated to produce the  more soluble alpha acids.) Because boiling evaporates away many of the volatile  aroma compounds, another dose of hops is sometimes added to the brew after  the boiling, specifically to add aroma. The aroma of ordinary hops is characterized  by the terpene myrcene, which is also found in bay leaf and verbena, and is woody  and resinous. “Noble” hop varieties are dominated by humulene, which is more  delicate, and often contain pine and citrus notes from other terpenes (pinene,
limonene, citral). The American variety “Cascades” has a distinctive floweriness (due  to linalool and geraniol).  Brewing Beer  The brewing of beer takes place in several stages.  •   Mashing : ground barley malt is soaked in hot water. This revives the barley  enzymes, which break starch into sugar chains and sugars, and protein into  amino acids. The result is a sweet, brown liquid called the   wort.  •   Boiling : hops are added to the wort, and the two are boiled together. This  treatment extracts the hop resins that flavor the beer, inactivates the  enzymes, kills any microbes present, deepens the color of the wort, and  concentrates it.  •   Fermentation : yeasts are added to the cooled wort and allowed to consume  sugars and produce alcohol until the desired levels of each are reached.  •   Conditioning : the new beer is held for some time to purge it of off-flavors,  clear it of yeasts and other materials that give it a cloudy appearance, and  develop carbonation.  Here are some details of each stage.  Mashing   In the stage known as mashing, the coarsely ground malt is soaked in  water   at   between   130   and   160ºF/54–70ºC   for   a   couple   of   hours.   Typical  proportions are around eight parts water per one part malt. Mashing is completed  by running the wort off the solid remains of the malt, which are then rinsed with  hot water — “sparged” — to remove some remaining extractable materials before  being discarded.  Mashing accomplishes several purposes. Above all, it gelates the starch granules  and allows the barley’s enzymes to break down long starch molecules into shorter  sugar chains and small fermentable sugars, and proteins into foam-stabilizing  amino-acid chains and fermentable single amino acids. And it extracts all these  substances, along with color and flavor substances, from the grain particles and  into the water.  Because the different enzymes work fastest at different temperatures, the brewer  can adjust the ratio of fermentable sugars to sugar chains, and amino acids to  amino-acid chains, by varying the temperature and time of mashing. By this
Brewing Beer  Making beer. Beer is made in two basic ways. Ales are fermented in less than a  week at a warm temperature and matured for days, while lagers are  fermented for more than a week at a cold temperature and matured for  weeks.
means he controls the beer’s final body, and the stability of its foam. Fully 85% of  the carbohydrate in malt is starch. In the liquid wort, 70% or more is in the form of  various   sugars,   mainly   the   two-glucose   sugar   called   maltose.   Most   of   the  remaining carbohydrates, 5 to 25% of the dissolved solids, are the so-called  dextrins,   or sugar chains of from four glucose units to a few hundred, which get  tangled up with each other, impede the movement of the water, and so provide a  full-bodied consistency to the wort and beer. The dextrins and amino-acid chains  will also slow the draining of fluid from the bubble walls of the beer foam, and so  contribute to its stability in the glass.  Cereal Adjuncts   Making the wort with nothing but barley malt and hot water is  the standard method in Germany, and in many U.S. microbreweries. In most large  breweries in the United States and elsewhere, unmalted “adjunct” sources of  carbohydrate — ground or flaked rice, corn, wheat, barley, even sugar — are  commonly added to the liquid to lower the amount of malt needed, and so the  brewer’s production costs. Unlike malt, they contribute little or no flavor of their  own. They’re therefore mostly limited to pale, mild brews like standard American  lagers, which may start with almost as much adjunct grain as malt.  Water   Water is the main ingredient in beer, so its quality has a definite influence on  beer quality. Though modern brewers can tailor the mineral content of their water  to the kind of beer they’re making, early brewers tailored their beers in part to  make the best of the local waters. The sulfate-rich water of Burton-on-Trent gave  English pale ales a bitterness that limited the use of hops, while the mild water of  Pilsen encouraged Czech brewers to add large amounts of bitter and aromatic  hops. The alkaline, carbonate-rich waters of Munich, southern England, and Dublin  can balance the acidity of dark malts that normally extract too much astringent  material from barley husks, and encouraged the development of dark German  beers and British porters and stouts.  Boiling the Wort   Once the liquid wort has been drawn off the grain solids, the  brewer runs it into a large metal tank, adds hops, and boils it vigorously for up to  90 minutes. Boiling converts the insoluble hop alpha acids into their soluble form  and develops the beer’s bitterness, and inactivates the barley enzymes and so fixes  the carbohydrate mix — a certain portion of sugar for the yeasts to convert into  alcohol, a certain portion of dextrins for the beer’s body. It sterilizes the wort so  that the brewing yeasts won’t have any competition during fermentation, and it  concentrates the wort by evaporating off some of its water. Boiling deepens the
wort’s color by encouraging browning reactions, mainly between the sugar  maltose and the amino acid proline. And it begins the process of clarifying the  brew by coagulating large proteins and causing them to bind with tannins from  the barley hulls, form large masses, and precipitate out of the solution. When  boiling is finished, the wort is strained, then cooled and aerated.  Fermentation   With boiling, the brewer has finished transforming the bland barley  grain into a rich, sweet liquid. Now the yeast cells transform this liquid into beer,  which is far less sweet, but more complex in flavor.  There are two basic methods for fermenting beer, and they produce distinctive  results. One is rapid fermentation at a high temperature with ale yeasts (strains of  Saccharomyces cerevisiae ) that clump together, trap the carbon dioxide gas that  they produce, and rise to the wort surface. The other is slow fermentation at a low  temperature with lager yeasts ( Saccharomyces uvarum   or   carlsbergensis ) that  remain submerged in the wort and fall to the bottom when fermentation is over.  These are often called “top” and “bottom” fermentations.  Top fermentation is usually carried out at between 64 and 77ºF/18–25ºC and takes  two to seven days, during which the yeasty foam is skimmed off several times.  Because the yeast layer at the top has a good supply of oxygen and is inevitably  contaminated by other airborne microbes, including lactic-acid bacteria, top-  fermented   beers   are   often   relatively   acidic   and   strong   in   flavor.   Bottom  fermentation goes on at distinctly lower temperatures, 43 to 50ºF/6–10ºC, takes six  to ten days, and produces a milder flavor. Bottom fermentation is the standard  technique in the United States. Because warm temperatures encourage yeasts to  generate particular aroma compounds (esters, volatile phenols), top fermentation  produces fruity, spicy aromas; cold, slow fermentation produces crisp beers with a  dry, bready flavor.  Conditioning   The treatment of beer after fermentation varies according to the  type of fermentation   that has   taken   place:   brief for fast   top   fermentation,  prolonged for slow bottom fermentation.  Top-fermented beer is cleared of yeast and then run into a tank or cask for  conditioning. The green beer, as it’s called fresh from fermentation, contains little  carbon dioxide, has a sulfurous, harsh flavor, and is hazy with the detritus of dead  yeast cells. In conditioning, a secondary fermentation is induced by adding to the  green beer either a small amount of yeast and some sugar or fresh wort, or some
actively fermenting wort (this is called   Kräusening ). Inside the closed cask or tank,  the liquid traps and absorbs the carbon dioxide produced. Undesirable odors can  be forced out of the beer by opening the container briefly and allowing some gas  to   escape.   These   traditional   techniques   are   sometimes   replaced   by   simply  pumping pure carbon dioxide into the beer — carbonating it. Some hops or hop  extract may also be added at this point to augment aroma, bitterness, or both. A  few days of cooling and the use of a “fining” agent — isinglass (fish gelatin), clay,  and vegetable gums are common — precipitate suspended proteins and tannins  that might later form a haze when the beer is chilled for drinking; this is called “cold  stabilization.” The beer is then centrifuged to remove any remaining yeast and  precipitate, filtered, packaged, and usually pasteurized.  The Different Flavor of Beer on Tap  Bottled and canned beers and ales are generally cold stabilized and  pasteurized (at 140–160ºF/60–70ºC) to survive extreme temperatures during  shipping and storage, while keg beers, which are kept refrigerated  continuously, may not be. This is why bottle and keg versions of the same  beer can taste very different. However, even keg beer is a world apart from  the traditional   cask-conditioned   beer. Keg beer has been cleared of all its yeast  before the keg is filled, while in cask conditioning, the new beer and the yeast  that will help mature it are sealed together in the cask. Cask-conditioned beer  is thus in contact with yeast until the moment it’s dispensed, and its flavor  reflects this. Cask beer is fragile and has a drinkable life of about a month,  compared with three months for keg beer.  Lagering   The conditioning process for bottom-fermented beer is somewhat  different. The original Bavarian lager was packed in ice and allowed to rest in  contact with its yeast dregs for several months. The yeast slowly produced carbon  dioxide, which helped purge the beer of sulfury off-odors. Today, some traditional  lagers are still aged for several months; but because storage has the economic  disadvantage of tying up money and materials, the tendency is to lager the green  beer at temperatures just above freezing for two to three weeks. Carbon dioxide  may be pumped in to purge undesired aromas; and centrifuges, filters, and
additives help clarify the beer. As a replacement for wooden casks, some beech or  hazelwood chips may be thrown into the tank for flavor.  Additives   More than 50 additives are permitted in American beer, including  preservatives, foaming agents (usually vegetable gums), and enzymes — similar to  meat tenderizers — that break down proteins into smaller molecules that are less  likely to cloud the brew. Some companies avoid the use of preservatives, and  usually advertise this fact on the label.  The Finished Beer   In the end, brewing has transformed the dry, tasteless barley  grain into a bubbly, bitter, acidic liquid (its pH is about 4) that is 90% water, 1 to 6%  alcohol, and between 2 and 10% carbohydrates, mainly the long-chain dextrins  that provide body.  Storing and Serving Beer  In contrast to wines, with their higher alcohol and antioxidant contents, most  beers do not improve with age, and are at their best fresh from the brewery.  Oxidation causes the gradual development of a stale, cardboard aroma (from  nonenal, a fatty-acid fragment) and harshness on the tongue (from hop phenolic  substances). Browning reactions cause other undesirable changes. Top-fermented  ales develop a solvent-like note. Staling is slowed at low temperatures, so when  possible beer should be stored in the cold. Britain does make “laying-down beers,”  and Belgium   bières de garde,   which start out fermentation with a very high soluble  carbohydrate content and continue to ferment slowly in the bottle, the continuous  production of carbon dioxide and other substances helping to prevent oxidation  and staling. They end with alcohol levels of 8% or more, and improve for a year or  two.  Keep Beer in the Dark   Beer should also be kept away from bright light, especially  sunlight, and especially if it has been bottled in clear or green glass: otherwise it  will develop a strong sulfurous odor. A cup of beer at a picnic can go skunky in a  few minutes; bottled beer in a fluorescent-lit display case may deteriorate in a few  days. It turns out that light in the blue-green to ultraviolet parts of the light  spectrum reacts with one of the hop acids to form an unstable free radical, which  in turn reacts with sulfur compounds to form a close relative of chemicals in the  skunk’s defensive arsenal. Brown glass can absorb blue-green wavelengths before  they get to the beer inside, but green bottles don’t. As a result, green-bottled
German and Dutch beers are often sulfurous, and many consumers now expect  this! One American brewer with trademark clear bottles developed a modified hop  extract that’s free of the vulnerable hop acid, and this prevents its beer from going  skunky.  Serving Beer   In the United States, beer is often drunk ice-cold and straight from  the can or bottle. This is fine for a light, thirst-quenching beer, but doesn’t do  justice to beers designed to have some character. The colder any food is, the less  full its flavor will seem. Lager beers are usually best served somewhat warmer than  refrigerator temperature, around 50ºF/10 C, while top-fermented ales are served at  a cool room temperature, from 50 to 60ºF/10–15ºC. Beers worth savoring are  poured into a glass, where some of the carbon dioxide gas can escape and  moderate their prickliness, and where their color and head of foam can be  appreciated.  Beer Foam: The “Head”   Beer is not the only intrinsically bubbly liquid we enjoy,  but it’s the only one whose bubbles we expect to persist long enough to form a  “head” of foam atop the glass. Beer lovers even value the ability of the foam to  cling to the glass as the liquid level drops, a quality known as   lacing   (or, in more  impressive German,   Schaumhaftvermögen ). There are many factors that influence  foaming, from the amount of carbon dioxide dissolved in the beer to the way the  beer is released from keg or can. Here are some of the most interesting.  Grain Proteins Stabilize the Head   Foam stability depends on the presence in the  bubble walls of emulsifier molecules with water-loving and water-avoiding ends  (p. 802); the water-avoiding ends project into the gas while the water-loving ends  stay in the liquid, and thus reinforce the gas-liquid interface. In beer, these  molecules are mostly medium-sized proteins that come from the malt or from  cereal adjuncts, whose proteins are more intact than malt’s and significantly  improve head stability. Hop acids also contribute to foam stability, and become  concentrated enough in the foam to make it noticeably more bitter than the liquid  beneath. Cool-fermented lagers generally give more persistent foams than warm-  fermented ales because the latter contain more foam-destabilizing higher alcohols  from yeast metabolism (p. 762).  Nitrogen Makes Creamy Foams   In the last decade, many beers have come to be  endowed with an especially fine, creamy head that used to be largely limited to  stouts. The creamy head comes from an artificial dose of nitrogen gas that may be
injected into beer at the brewery, or in the bar or pub by the tap that delivers beer  from the keg, or by a small device inside an individual beer can. Nitrogen is less  soluble in water than carbon dioxide, so its bubbles are slower to lose gas to the  surrounding liquid, and slower to coarsen and deflate. Nitrogen bubbles remain  small, and persist. They also don’t carry the tart prickliness of carbon dioxide,  which becomes carbonic acid when it dissolves in beer and on the surface of our  tongue.  Foam in the Glass   An initially vigorous pouring action develops the head of foam  with a small, easily controlled portion of the beer. Once the foam is of the desired  thickness, the rest of the beer can be poured in gently along the side of the glass,  avoiding aeration and nucleation of new bubbles. The glass itself should be clean  of any residues of oil or soap, which interfere with foaming. (These molecules have  water-avoiding ends that pull the similar ends of the bubble-stabilizing proteins  out of the bubbles.) By the same token, if a newly poured beer threatens to foam  over, it can often be stopped in its tracks by touching the rim with a finger or lip,  which carry traces of oil.  Kinds and Qualities of Beer  Beers are a wonderfully diverse group of drinks, and a good beer can be a mouth-  filling experience, one that rewards slow savoring. There are several qualities worth  appreciating:  •   Color, which can range from pale yellow to impenetrable brown-black, and  comes from the kinds of malt used  •   Body, or weightiness in the mouth, which comes from the long remnants of  starch molecules in the malt  •   Astringency, from malt phenolic compounds  •   Prickly freshness, from dissolved carbon dioxide  •   Taste,   which   may   include   saltiness   from   the   water,   sweetness   from  unfermented malt sugars, acidity from roasted malt and from fermentation  microbes, bitterness from hops and from dark-roasted malts, savoriness from  malt amino acids  •   Aroma, from woody, floral, citrusy hops; malty, caramel, and even smoky  malt; and from the yeasts and other microbes, which can produce notes that  seem fruity (apple, pear, banana, citrus), flowery (rose), buttery, spicy (clove),
and even horsey or stable-like (p. 738)  Ales develop a characteristic tartness and fruitiness from their diverse group of  fermentation microbes. Lagers have a more subdued aroma, part of whose  foundation is cooked-corn-like DMS (dimethyl sulfide), which comes from a  precursor in the lightly roasted malt and is produced while the wort is boiled and  then cooled. But there’s tremendous variation in the flavors of these basic beers.  Rich and somewhat sweet brews — porter, stout, barley wine — can even go well  with desserts.  In addition to the many variations on the two themes of beer and ale, there are  two kinds of beer that are worth special mention for their distinctiveness.  Some Styles and Qualities of Beer  Beer Style  Alcohol  Content,  Percent by  Volume   Unusual Ingredients   Qualities  Pale lager:  European  4–6   Malty, bitter and  spicy/floral from  hops  American/  International  3.5–5   Unmalted grains   Little malt or hop  aroma or bitterness;  cooked-corn, green  apple notes  Dark lager:  European  4.3–5.6   Malty, somewhat  sweet  American   4–5   Unmalted grains,  caramel coloring  Little malt or hop  aroma; cooked-corn  note; some  sweetness  Bock   6–12   Malty, caramel,  somewhat sweet
Beer Style  Alcohol  Content,  Percent by  Volume   Unusual Ingredients   Qualities  Pale ale:  English  3–6.2   Balanced malt and  hop aromas, fruity,  moderately bitter  Belgian   4–5.6   Spices   Spicy, fruity,  moderately bitter  American   4–5.7  India   5–7.8   Strong hop aroma  and bitterness  Brown ale   3.5–6   Somewhat sweet,  nutty, fruity  Porter   3.8–6   Dark malts   Malty, roasted  coffee/chocolate  notes, somewhat  sweet  Stout   3–6   Dark malts, roasted  unmalted barley  Like porter but less  sweet, more bitter  Imperial  stout  8–12   Dark malts, roasted  unmalted barley  Like stout, but  stronger (originally  for export to Russia)  Wheat beer:  Bavarian  2.8–5.6   Wheat malt, special  yeasts  Wheat, grain,  tartness, banana and  clove notes  Berlin   2.8–3.6   Lactobacillus   culture   Wheat, slightly fruity,  sour
Beer Style  Alcohol  Content,  Percent by  Volume   Unusual Ingredients   Qualities  Belgian   4.2–5.5   Unmalted wheat, spices,  bitter orange peel,  special yeasts,  Lactobacillus   culture  Wheat, spice, citrus,  tartness  American   3.7–5.5   Normal yeasts   Wheat, grain, light  hop aromas, light  bitterness  Belgian  lambics  Unmalted wheat, aged  hops, wild yeasts and  bacteria  Faro   4.7–5.8   Spices, sugar   Spicy, sweet  Gueuze   4.7–5.8   Blends of several ages   Tart, fruity, complex  Fruit   4.7–5.8   Cherry, raspberry, other  fruits  Tart, fruity, complex  Barley wine   8–12+   Malty, fruity, full-  bodied  Adapted from “Guide to Beer Styles,” Beer Judge Certification Program 2001,  and other sources.  Wheat Beers   German wheat beers differ from the usual Bavarian brew in four  ways. First, a large fraction of the barley malt is replaced by wheat malt, which  carries more protein, produces a more foamy and hazy brew, and lightens the  typical malt flavor. Second, wheat beers are top-fermented like ales, and so  develop more tartness and fruitiness. Third, the culture often includes an unusual  yeast ( Torulaspora ) that produces aroma compounds not usually found in beer.  These volatile phenols (vinyl guaiacol, p. 738) may suggest cloves and similar  spices, but also a medicinal quality like that of plastic bandages, or an animal  quality reminiscent of the barnyard or stable. Finally, some wheat beers are not
fully   clarified,   and   retain   some   of   their   yeast,   which   gives   them   a   cloudy  appearance and yeasty flavor. German wheat beers may be called   Weizen   for  “wheat,”   Hefe-weizen   for “yeast-wheat,” or   Weissen   for “white,” referring to their  cloudy appearance.  Some American breweries now produce wheat beers on the German model, but  usually without the phenol-producing yeast; they are mild, tart, and cloudy.  Beers Low in Calories, Alcohol, and Beer Flavor  Nowadays there are versions of beer for people who like beer but don’t want  to consume alcohol, or want to consume alcohol but reduce their intake of  calories. A standard 12 oz/360 ml container of American lager contains about  14 grams of alcohol and 11 grams of carbohydrate, for a total of about 140  calories. Low-calorie “light” or “dry” beers have 100–110 calories, a savings  produced by using a lower proportion of malt and adjuncts to water, and  then adding enzymes that digest more of the carbohydrates into fermentable  sugars. The fermentation then produces a brew with only a slightly lower  alcohol content, but about half the sugar chains — and very little body.  “Nonalcoholic beers” can be made by modifying the fermentation so that the  yeasts produce little alcohol (very low temperatures, abundant oxygen), or by  removing the alcohol from normally fermented beer using a molecular  version of sieving called “reverse osmosis.”   The lowest-alcohol malt product is  “malta,” a popular drink in the Caribbean made by bottling a full-fledged wort  without any fermentation at all. It is dense and sweet.  Then there are “malt beverages,” which have the alcohol and calorie content  of beer, but taste nothing like beer: they’re more like soft drinks. In these  products, the only purpose of the malt is to generate sugars for fermentation  into alcohol; neither it nor the yeast contributes any flavor.  Belgian Lambic Beers   The brewers of Belgium have been more inventive than any  others. They allow many different microbes to participate in the fermentation; they  ferment some beers for years, either continuously or by restarting them; they  flavor their beers with spices and herbs, and even re-ferment them with fresh fruits
to make a hybrid beer and fruit wine. They generally used aged hops, which are  less harmful to the unusual brewing microbes, less bitter, and higher in drying,  slightly astringent, wine-like tannins.  The most unusual   Belgian   beers are the   lambics.   The hallmark of brewing  traditional lambic is a spontaneous and months-long fermentation of the wort in  wood barrels. Once the wort has been boiled, it is cooled in a broad open tank,  where it picks up microbes from the ambient air. The cool wort is then poured into  wooden casks that contribute microbes from previous batches, and ferments in  the casks for 6 to 24 months. The fermentation proceeds in four stages: an initial  growth of wild yeasts ( Kloeckera   and others) and various bacteria ( Enterobacter   and  others) that takes 10–15 days and produces acetic acid and vegetable aromas; the  main alcohol-producing growth of   Saccharomyces   yeasts, which dominate for  several months; at 6 to 8 months, the acid-producing growth of lactic and acetic  bacteria ( Pediococcus, Acetobacter ); and finally the growth of   Brettanomyces   yeasts,  which produce a range of fruity, spicy, smoky, and animal aromas (see box, p. 730).  The resulting brew may then be blended with other lambics and aged to make  gueuze,   with a wine-like acidity and complexity; or blended with some ordinary  top-fermented ale and flavored with sugar and coriander to make   faro ; or re-  fermented in the barrel for four to six months with fresh whole cherries or  raspberries, to make   kriek   and   framboise.  Asian Rice Alcohols: Chinese   Chiu   and Japanese   Sake  Sweet Moldy Grains  The peoples of eastern Asia developed their own distinctive form of alcohol, one  that the rest of the world is coming to appreciate more and more. It’s not exactly a  wine, because it’s fermented from starchy grains, mainly rice. But it’s not exactly a  beer either, because the grain starch is not digested into fermentable sugars by  grain enzymes. Instead, Asian brewers use a mold to supply the starch-digesting  enzymes, and the mold digests the grain starch at the same time that the yeasts  are converting the sugars into alcohol. The resulting liquid can reach an alcohol  concentration of 20%, far stronger than Western beers and wines. Chinese   chiu   and  Japanese   sake   don’t have the grapey fruitiness or acidity of wine, nor the malt or  hop characters of beer. Because it’s made from only the starchy heart of the rice
grain, sake is perhaps the purest expression of the flavor of fermentation itself,  surprisingly fruity and flowery even though no fruit or flower has come near it.  Why and how did Asians come up with this alternative to sprouting grains? The  historian H. T. Huang suggests that the key was their reliance on small, fragile millet  and rice grains, which unlike barley and wheat are easily and usually cooked  whole. Huang speculates that leftover cooked grains were frequently left sitting  out long enough to get moldy; and because there are air spaces in a mass of  grains, the oxygen-requiring molds would have grown well and digested starch  throughout the mass. People eventually noticed that moldy rice tasted sweet and  smelled alcoholic. Sometime before the 3rd century   BCE , these simple observations  led to a regular technique for producing alcoholic liquids. By 500   CE , a Chinese  source lists nine different mold preparations and 37 different alcoholic products.  Today, few people outside of China have heard of   chiu,   but many millions have  heard of its Japanese counterpart,   sake (pronounced “sa-kay”). Rice cultivation and  probably   chiu   production were brought to Japan from the Asian mainland around  300   BCE . Over the following centuries, Japanese brewers so refined   chiu   that it  became something distinctive.  Starch-Digesting Molds  Though   modern   industrial   production   has   brought   a   number   of   common  shortcuts and simplifications, Chinese and Japanese brewers have traditionally  used very different preparations for breaking rice starch down into fermentable  sugars.  Chinese   Chhü   : Several Molds and Yeasts   The ancient Chinese preparation,   chhü,  is usually made from wheat or rice, and includes several different kinds of mold as  well as the yeasts that will eventually produce the alcohol. Some of the wheat may  be roasted or left raw, but most is steamed, coarsely ground, shaped into cakes,  and then left to mold in incubation rooms for several weeks. Species of   Aspergillus  grow on the outside, and species of   Rhizopus   and   Mucor   on the inside.   Aspergillus   is  the same kind of mold used to digest soybeans to make soy sauce and   Rhizopus   is  the major mold in soybean   tempeh   (p. 496, 500), while   Mucor   is important in some  kinds of aged cheeses. All of them accumulate starch-and protein-digesting  enzymes, and generate trace byproducts that contribute flavor. Once the grain  cakes have been well permeated with microbes, they’re dried for storage. When
needed for   chiu   production, they’re soaked in water for several days to reactivate  the microbes and their enzymes.  Pasteurization Before Pasteur  Unlike European wines and beers,   chiu   was usually served warm or hot.  Perhaps because they noticed that heated leftovers kept better than the  original   batch,   by   1000CE   the   Chinese   had   developed   the   practice   of  steaming containers of newly fermented   chiu   to slow its deterioration. In the  16th century, Japanese brewers refined this method by lowering the heating  temperature to 140–150ºF/60–65ºC, which is high enough to kill most  enzymes and microbes, but does less damage to the flavor of the sake. Asian  brewers were thus “pasteurizing” their alcohols centuries before Louis Pasteur  suggested gently heating wine and milk to kill spoilage microbes.  Japanese   Koji   and   Moto : One Mold, Separate Yeast   The Japanese   koji,   by  contrast, is made fresh for each particular sake brewing, is based only on polished,  unground rice, and is inoculated with a selected culture of   Aspergillus oryzae   alone,  with no other molds. The mold preparation for sake therefore doesn’t provide the  complexity of flavor that the Chinese preparation does, with its roasted wheat,  variety of microbes, and period of drying.  Because the koji contains no yeasts, the Japanese system requires a separate  source of yeast. The traditional yeast preparation, the   moto,   is made by allowing a  mixture of koji and cooked rice gruel to sour spontaneously with a mixed  population   of   bacteria,   mainly   lactic   acid   producers   ( Lactobacillus   sake,  Leuconostoc mesenteroides , and others) that contribute tart and savory tastes and  some aroma. A pure yeast culture is then added and allowed to multiply. Because  this microbe-soured moto takes more than a month to mature, it has been largely  replaced by the simple addition of organic acids to the moto mash, or by the  addition of acids and concentrated yeasts directly to the main fermentation. These  time-saving methods tend to produce lighter, less complex sakes.
Brewing Rice Alcohols  Simultaneous, Stepwise Fermentation   Chinese and Japanese brewing methods  differ in important details, but they also share several important features. The  starch-digesting molds and alcohol-producing yeasts are added to the cooked rice  gruel together, and work simultaneously. Unlike the making of beer, where a liquid  is extracted from the grain and only the liquid is fermented, the thick gruel of  cooked rice is fermented whole. And the rice is introduced gradually into the  fermentation, not all at once: new portions of cooked rice and water are added to  the vat at intervals during the fermentation, which lasts from two weeks to several  months. All of these practices apparently contribute to the yeasts’ ability to  continue producing alcohol to high concentrations. When rice is added toward the  end of fermentation, some sugar remains unmetabolized by the yeasts, and the  resulting alcohol is sweet.  Chinese Practice: Ordinary Rice and High Temperatures   Traditional Chinese  brewing begins with soaking the mold preparation in water for several days, and  then proceeds with the periodic addition of ordinary cooked rice over the course  of an initial fermentation that may last one or two weeks at a temperature around  85ºF/30ºC. At the end of this phase, the mash is often divided into smaller  containers and held at cooler temperatures for weeks or months. The liquid is then  pressed from the solids, filtered, adjusted with water and colored with caramel,  pasteurized at 190–200ºF/85–90ºC for 5–10 minutes, matured for several months,  then filtered and packaged. The high-temperature pasteurization helps develop  the finished flavor.  Japanese Practice: Polished Rice and Low Temperatures   Chinese brewers use  rice that has been milled to remove about 10% of the grain, only slightly more than  is removed to make ordinary white rice for cooking (p. 472). In Japan, however, the  rice for anything above the standard grade of sake must be milled to remove a  minimum of 30% of the grain, and the highest grades of sake are made with rice  that has been polished down to 50% or less of its original weight. The center of the  rice grain is the portion that contains the most starch and the least protein or oil,  so the more the outer layers of the rice are ground away, the simpler and purer the  remaining grain, and the less grain flavor it contributes to the final liquid.
Making Sake  Making sake. One of the unusual features of sake fermentation is the repeated  addition of cooked rice to the fermenting mash over the course of several  weeks.  Sake is also fermented at significantly lower temperatures than Chinese rice
alcohols. Beginning in the 18th century, most sake brewing was reserved for the  winter months, and this remains largely the case today. The upper limit for sake  brewing is around 64ºF/18ºC, and brewers of the highest grades will keep the  temperature at a distinctly chilly 50ºF/10ºC. In these conditions, the fermentation  takes about a month instead of two to three weeks, and the mash accumulates  two to five times the normal quantity of aroma compounds, notably the esters that  provide apple, banana, and other fruity notes.  Once the sake fermentation is complete, the liquid is pressed from the solids, then  filtered, diluted with water to 15–16% alcohol, and held for some weeks to allow  the flavor to mellow. It’s also pasteurized (at 140–150ºF/60–65ºC) after filtering and  again before bottling to denature any remaining enzymes, one of which otherwise  slowly generates a particularly unpleasant volatile (sweaty isovaleraldehyde).  Varieties of Sake   There is a broad range of different grades and kinds of sake. Both  the cheapest and the standard grades are made by adding substantial amounts of  pure alcohol to the mash just before pressing. This became standard industrial  practice during the war years because it greatly increases the yield from a given  quantity of rice. Sugar and various organic acids can also be added to these grades.  At the other end of the scale, there are premium versions made with nothing but  rice, water, and microbes, painstakingly cultured in the traditional way. The box  below gives examples of some kinds worth seeking out.  Though much sake is drunk warm as Chinese rice alcohols are, connoisseurs prefer  to chill finer examples. In general, sake is less tart and more delicately flavored than  wine. Savory amino acids are an important element. Its aroma varies a great deal  depending on how it was made, and features the biochemical artistry of the yeasts.  Fruity esters and flowery complex alcohols are usually prominent.  Sake Is Fragile   Sake and its delicate flavors are vulnerable to alteration by  exposure to both light and high temperatures. It’s best drunk as young as possible.  The clear and blue bottles in which it’s usually packaged offer little protection, so  sake should be kept in the cool and dark of the refrigerator, and once opened  should be consumed quickly.
Some Kinds of Sake  Sake made to be savored is usually of the grade   ginjo,   or “special,” in which  pure alcohol is the only allowed additive and at least 40% of the rice grain has  been removed.   Junmaishu   is sake made only with rice and water. Some  interesting specialty sakes include the following:  Genmaishu   Brewed with brown rice  Genshu   Undiluted, and so around 20% alcohol  Kimoto   “Live” moto, the yeast preparation soured slowly by  bacteria and not instantly with pure acids  Namazake   “Live” sake because unpasteurized and so containing active  enzymes, to be kept refrigerated and drunk soon  Orizake and  Nigorizake  Cloudy sakes that include lees, yeast cells, and other fine  particles from the mash  Shizuku   “Droplets” sake, made by allowing the liquid to drain by  gravity from the mash rather than pressing  Taruzake   “Keg” sake, aged in cedar barrels  Japanese Cooking Alcohols: Mirin and Sake Lees  Mirin   is a sweet Japanese cooking alcohol. It’s made by combining cooked  polished rice, koji, and   shochu,   a distilled spirit made from a low-grade sake.  The alcohol inhibits any further alcoholic fermentation. Instead, during two  months at a warm 77–86ºF/25–30ºC, the koji mold and enzymes slowly  convert the rice starch into glucose. The full-bodied liquid is drawn off and  clarified, and ends up at around 14% alcohol and from 10% to as much as  45% sugar. Industrial imitations are made from grain alcohol, sugar, and  flavorings.  The solids left after pressing and filtering the sake mash are called   sake kasu,  or sake lees. They include starch, proteins, the cell walls of rice, yeasts, and  molds, and some acids, alcohol, and enzymes. These sake lees are much used
in Japanese cooking, especially in the making of vegetable pickles, marinades  for fish, and soups.  Distilled Spirits  Distilled spirits are the concentrated essence of wine and beer. They’re the product  of a basic chemical fact: different substances boil at different temperatures. The  boiling point of alcohol is about 173ºF/78ºC, well below water’s 212ºF/100ºC. This  means that if a mixture of water and alcohol is heated, more of the alcohol than  the water will end up in the vapor. That vapor can then be cooled and condensed  back into a liquid that has a higher alcoholic content than the original beer or  wine.  Distilled spirits were first valued, and still are, for their high alcohol content. But  there’s much more to them than their intoxicating power. Like alcohol, the  substances that give wine and beer their aroma are also volatile: so the same  process that concentrates alcohol also concentrates aroma. Distilled alcohols are  some of the most intensely flavorful foods we have.  The History of Distilled Spirits  The Discovery of Distillation   High concentrations of alcohol are toxic to all living  things, including the yeasts that produce it. Brewing yeasts can’t tolerate more  than about 20%. So stronger drink can only be made by physically concentrating  the alcohol in fermented liquids. The key to discovering distilled alcohol would  have been two observations: that the vapors of a heated liquid can be recaptured  by condensing them on a cool surface, and that the vapors of heated wine or beer  are more strongly alcoholic than the original liquid.  The practice of distillation itself appears to be very old. There’s evidence that the  Mesopotamians were concentrating the essential oils of aromatic plants more than  5,000 years ago, using a simple heated pot and a lid onto which vapors condensed  and could be collected. And Aristotle noted in the 4th century   BCE   in his  Meteorology   that “Sea water, when it is converted into vapor, becomes drinkable,  nor does it form sea water when it condenses again.” Concentrated alcohol may
have been discovered for the first time in ancient China. Archaeological finds and  written documents suggest that Chinese alchemists were distilling small amounts  of concentrated alcohol from grain preparations around 2,000 years ago. A  privileged few were drinking it before the 10th century, and by the 13th it was a  commercial product.  Food Words:   Distill  The word   distill   comes from the Latin   destillare,   “to drip.” It thus captures the  moment at which the barely visible vapors from a hot liquid condense and  rematerialize on a cool surface.  Spirits and Waters of Life   In Europe, significant quantities of distilled alcohol were  produced around 1100 at the medical school in Salerno, Italy, where it developed  its reputation as a uniquely valuable medicine. Two hundred years later, the  Catalan scholar Arnaud of Villanova dubbed the active principle of wine   aqua vitae,  the “water of life,” a term that lives on in Scandinavia ( aquavit ), in France ( eau de  vie ), and in English:   whisky   is the anglicized version of the Gaelic for “water of life,”  uisge beatha   or   usquebaugh,   which is what Irish and Scots monks called their  distilled barley beer. Throughout the Old World, alchemists thought of distilled  alcohol as a uniquely powerful substance, the   quintessence   or fifth element that  was as fundamental as earth, water, air, and fire. The first printed book devoted to  distillation, Hieronymus Brunschwygk’s   Liber de arte distillandi   (1500), explained  that the process achieves  the separation of the gross from the subtle and the subtle from the gross, the  breakable and destructible from the indestructible, the material from the  immaterial, so as to make the body more spiritual, the unlovely lovely, to  make the spiritual lighter by its subtlety, to penetrate with its concealed  virtues and force into the human body to do its healing duty.  It’s this connection between distillation and the pure and ethereal that gives us our  synonym for distilled alcohol,   spirits.  From Medicine to Pleasure and Drug of Oblivion   For several centuries after its
discovery,   aqua   vitae   was   produced   in   apothecaries   and   monasteries   and  prescribed as a   cordial,   a medicine to stimulate the circulation (the word comes  from the Latin for “heart”). It seems to have been liberated from the pharmacy and  drunk for pleasure in the 15th century, when the terms   Bernewyn   and   brannten  Wein,   ancestors of our word   brandy   that meant “burning” or “burnt” wine, appear in  German laws about public drunkenness. This is also when winemakers in the  Armagnac region of southwest France began to distill their wine into spoilage-  resistant brandy for shipping to northern Europe. Gin, a whisky-like medicinal  concoction from rye, with juniper added for its flavor and diuretic effect, was first  formulated in 16th century Holland. The renowned brandy of France’s Cognac, just  to the north of Bordeaux, arose around 1620. Rum was first made from molasses in  the English West Indies around 1630, and monastic liqueurs like Benedictine and  Chartreuse date from about 1650 on.  Over the next couple of centuries, the drinkability of spirits improved as distillers  learned how to refine their composition. First came double distillation, in which a  wine or beer is distilled, and the distillate then distilled a second time; then in the  late 18th and early 19th centuries came ingenious French and English column stills,  which produce alcohols of greater purity in one continuous process. The growing  availability and drinkability of distilled liquors meant that addiction became a  serious problem, particularly among the urban populations of the Industrial  Revolution. In England the principal scourge was cheap gin, which the average  Londoner in the late 18th century consumed at the rate of nearly a pint/400 ml a  day “to seek relief in the temporary oblivion of his own misery,” as Charles Dickens  later wrote in   Sketches by Boz.   Government control of production and social  progress later moderated the problem of alcohol addiction, but hasn’t eliminated  it.  Whiskey in America   Distilled alcohol was so popular in North America that it gave  us an enduring legacy: the Internal Revenue Service! In the early days of the  colonies and then the United States, molasses was more plentiful than barley, and  rum more common than beer. Rye and barley spirits were also being distilled in the  northern   colonies   by   1700,   and   Kentuckycorn   whiskey   by   1780.   After   the  Revolutionary War, the new American government tried to raise revenues for its  war debts by taxing distillation, and in 1794 the largely Scots-Irish region of  western Pennsylvania rose in the short-lived Whiskey Rebellion. When President  Washington   called   out   federal   troops   to   put   it   down,   the   rebellion   went
underground and “moon-shining” became entrenched, especially in the poor hills  of the South where the small amount of corn that could be grown would fetch a  better price if fermented and distilled. This evasion led the federal government to  form the Office of Internal Revenue in 1862. Sixty years later, the national taste for  hard   liquor   was   an   important   stimulus   to   the   temperance   movement   that  culminated in Prohibition.  Recent Times: The Rise of the Cocktail   It was in the 19th century that mixtures of  distilled and other alcohols, or cocktails, became fashionable before-dinner drinks  in Europe and the Americas. This development led to a mind-numbing explosion  of inventiveness: bartenders’ manuals now list hundreds of different named  cocktails. The origins of the preeminent cocktail, the martini (gin and vermouth),  are disputed; it may have been invented several times in different places. The gin  and tonic comes from British India, where gin helped make antimalarial quinine  water more palatable. In the United States, one of the first famous mixed drinks  was the sazerac of New Orleans (brandy and bitters), while Winston Churchill’s  mother is said to have incited the creation of the manhattan (whiskey, vermouth,  bitters) at a New York club. Prohibition and harsh “bathtub gin” slowed further  progress from 1920 to 1934. In the 1950s, mixologists discovered the value of  vodka as a largely flavorless alcohol, and the appeal of sweet-tart fruit juices and  sweet liqueurs. Over the next few decades they concocted such broadly popular  drinks as the mai tai, piña colada, screwdriver, daiquiri, margarita, and tequila  sunrise. In the 1970s, vodka dethroned whiskey as America’s best-selling spirit.  The late 20th century brought a modest revival of interest in the more austere  classic cocktails, and in fine distilled spirits of all kinds, mixed with nothing more  than water.  Making Distilled Alcohols  All distilled alcohols are made in basically the same way.  •   Fruits, grains, or other sources of carbohydrates are fermented with yeasts to  make a liquid with a moderate alcohol content, from 5 to 12% by volume.  •   This liquid is heated in a chamber that collects the alcohol-and aroma-rich  vapors as they escape from the boiling liquid, and then passes them across  cooler metal surfaces, where the vapors condense and are collected as a  separate liquid.
•   The concentrated alcoholic liquid is then modified in various ways for  consumption. It may be flavored with herbs or spices, or aged in wood  barrels. The alcohol content is usually adjusted with the addition of water  before it’s bottled for sale.  Food Words:   Alcohol  Our word   alcohol   comes from medieval Arab alchemy, which strongly  influenced Western science and gave it several other important terms,  including   chemistry, alkali,   and   algebra.   To the Arabs,   al kohl   was the dark  powder of the metal antimony, which women used to darken their eyelids. By  a process of generalization, it came to mean any fine powder, and then for the  essence of any material.   Alcohol   was first used to mean the essence of wine  itself by the 16th-century German alchemist Paracelsus.  The Distilling Process   The essential principle of distillation is a simple one: both  alcohol and aromatic substances are more volatile in water than water itself, so  they evaporate in disproportionate amounts from wine and beer and become  concentrated in the vapor. But it’s not a simple matter to make a delicious distilled  alcohol, or even a drinkable one. Yeast fermentation produces thousands of  volatile substances, and not all of them are desirable. Some are unpleasant, and  others, notably methanol, are dangerously toxic.  Selecting Desirable Volatiles   Distillers must therefore control the composition of  the distilled liquid. They do this by subdividing the vapor into fractions that are  more and less volatile, and collecting mainly the fraction that is richest in alcohol.  The fraction more volatile than alcohol, often called the “heads” or “foreshots”  because it evaporates earlier than alcohol, includes toxic methanol, or wood  alcohol, and acetone. The fraction that’s less volatile than alcohol, the “tails” or  “feints,” includes a host of aromatic substances that are desirable. Among these  “congeners” (substances that accompany alcohol) are esters, terpenes, and volatile  phenolics, along with some substances that are desirable in limited amounts. The  most notable of the latter are the “higher” alcohols, whose long, fat-like chains can  give spirits a full, almost oily body, but also contribute a pronounced harsh flavor
and unpleasant aftereffects. They’re often called   fusel oils.   ( Fusel   is the German for  “rotgut.”) A small dose of fusel oils gives a distilled alcohol character; too much  makes it unpleasant.  The structures of several different alcohols. Methanol is a poison because our bodies  convert it into formic acid, which accumulates and damages the eyes and brain.  Ethanol is the main alcohol produced by yeasts. Butyl and amyl alcohols are two of the  “higher,” or longer-chain alcohols. When concentrated by distillation, they contribute  an oily consistency to spirits thanks to their fat-like hydrocarbon tails.  Purity and Flavor   The best indication of how strongly flavored a distilled alcohol  will be is the percentage of alcohol in the liquid immediately after distillation,  before it’s further treated by aging and/or dilution with water to its final strength  (see box, p. 765). The higher the alcohol content to which it’s distilled, the purer a  mixture of alcohol and water it is, the lower the proportion of fusel oils and other  aromatics, and so the more neutral the flavor. Vodkas are usually distilled to 90%  alcohol or more; brandies and flavorful malt and corn whiskies to 60–80%. Crudely  distilled moonshine is only 20–30% alcohol, and therefore harsh and even  hazardous.  Concentration by Freezing
Distillation is the most common way of making concentrated alcohols, but it’s  not the only way. Freezing also concentrates the alcohol in fermented liquids,  by causing the water to form a mass of solid crystals from which an alcohol-  enriched fluid can be drained. (Alcohol freezes at –173ºF/–114ºC, far below  water’s freezing point of 32ºF/0ºC.) In the 17th century, Francis Bacon noted  Paracelsus’s claim that “if a glass of wine be set upon a terrace in bitter frost, it  will leave some liquor unfrozen in the center of the glass, which excelleth  spiritus vini   [spirit of wine] drawn by fire.”   The nomads of central Asia  apparently applied “freezing-out” to their alcoholic mare’s milk,   koumiss,   and  European settlers in North America made apple brandy — applejack — in the  same way. Freezing-out produces a different kind of concentrated alcohol.  There’s no heating step that alters the aroma, and unlike distillation it retains  and concentrates the sugars, savory amino acids, and other nonvolatile  substances that contributed to the original liquid’s taste and body.  Pot distillation. As wine or beer is gradually heated, the composition of its vapors  changes, with very volatile substances evaporating first, less volatile substances later.  The distiller diverts early and late vapors with their undesirable volatiles, and collects  the “main run,” rich in alcohol and desirable aromas.  Pot or Batch Distillation: Selecting Volatiles by Time   There are two ways for  distillers to separate the vapor into undesirable heads, somewhat desirable tails,  and the desirable main run of alcohol. The original way, and the way that is still
used for many of the finest liquors, is separation in a simple pot still by   time.   It can  take 12 hours or more for a batch of beer or wine to be heated close to the boil and  then distilled. The very volatile head vapors come off first, followed by the main  alcohol-rich run, and then the less volatile fusel-oil tails. So the distiller can divert  the initial vapors, collect the desirable main run in a different container, and then  divert the late vapors again. In practice, distillers repeat the pot distillation, the first  pass giving spirits with 20–30% alcohol, and the second 50–70%.  Continuous distillation in a column still. The plates in each column are hottest at the  steam input and coolest at the other end. Substances with low boiling points,  including alcohol, are concentrated in the vapor that leaves the first column and rises  in the second, and the alcohol-rich fraction is collected at a particular position in the  second column.  Continuous Distillation: Selecting Volatiles by Position   The second way in which  distillers can separate the desirable volatiles from the rest is by their   position   in a  column still, an elongated chamber developed by French and British distillers  during the Industrial Revolution. In a column still, the starting wine or beer is fed  into the column from the top, and the column is heated from the bottom with  steam. The bottom of the column is therefore the hottest region, the top the  coolest. Methanol and other low-boiling substances remain vaporized throughout  all but the very top of the column, while fusel oils and other aromatics with high  boiling points will condense on collection plates at hotter positions toward the
bottom of the column, and alcohol will condense — and can be collected — at an  intermediate point. The advantage of the column still is that it can be operated  continuously and without the necessity of close monitoring; the disadvantage is  that it offers less opportunity than the pot still for the distiller to control the  composition of the distillate. When two or more columns are run together in series,  they’re capable of producing a neutral distillate that is 90–95% alcohol.  Maturation and Aging   Fresh from the still, distilled liquors are as colorless as  water, or “white.” They’re also rough and harsh, so all are matured for weeks or  months to allow the various components to react with each other, form new  combinations, and become less irritating. From this point, the spirits are handled  differently according to the kind of product they’re meant to become. “White”  spirits, including vodka and eaux de vie made from fruits, are not aged; they may  be flavored, then adjusted to the proper alcohol content by the addition of water,  and bottled. “Brown” spirits, including brandies and whiskies, are so called because  they’re aged in wood barrels, from which they derive a characteristic tawny color  and complexity of flavor. (Some brown spirits may be colored with caramel  instead.) Spirits may be barrel-aged for anything from a few months to decades,  during which their flavor changes considerably.  The extraction, absorption, and oxidation processes that take place during barrel  aging result in the development of a mellow, rich flavor (p. 720). And the barrel  allows both water and alcohol to evaporate from the spirits, thus concentrating the  remaining substances. A barrel may lose several percent of its volume per year;  that portion is called “the angels’ share,” and it may approach half the barrel  volume after 15 years.  Final Adjustments   When spirits are judged ready for bottling, they’re usually  blended to obtain a consistent flavor, and diluted with water to the desired final  alcohol content, in the neighborhood of 40%. Small quantities of other ingredients  may be added to fine-tune the flavor and color; these include caramel coloring,  sugar, a water extract made by boiling wood chips (the   boisé   of Cognac and  Armagnac), and wine or sherry (blended U.S. and Canadian whiskeys).  Chill-Filtering   Many spirits are   chill-filtered : chilled to below the freezing point of  water, and then filtered to remove the cloudy material that forms. The substances  that form the cloud are poorly soluble fusel oils and volatile fatty acids from the  original spirits, and a variety of similar substances extracted from the barrel. Their
removal prevents the spirits from clouding when the drinker chills them or dilutes  them with water, but it also removes some flavor and body, so some producers  choose not to chill-filter. Clouding does not occur in spirits with more than about  46% alcohol, so such undiluted “cask-strength” spirits are often not chill-filtered.  (Some spirits cloud spectacularly; see p. 771).  Concentrated Alcohol:   Proof  The term   proof   is sometimes used to designate the alcoholic content of  distilled liquors. In the United States, the proof designation is just about  double the percentage by volume of alcohol, so that 100 proof, for example,  designates 50% alcohol. (The proof number is slightly more than double the  percentage, because alcohol causes a volume of water to contract on mixing.)  The term   proof   comes from a 17th century test for proving the quality of  spirits that involved moistening gunpowder with the spirits, and then putting  a flame to it. If the gunpowder burned slowly, the spirits were at proof; if it  spluttered or burst into flame, they were under or over proof respectively.  Serving and Enjoying Spirits  Crystal Decanters Can Be Hazardous   High-alcohol spirits are biologically and  chemically stable and can be kept for years without spoiling. One traditional and  decorative way of storing them has been the decanter made of glass crystal, which  derives its weight and appearance from the element lead. Unfortunately, lead is  powerfully toxic to the nervous system, and readily leaches from crystal into spirits  and other acidic liquids. Old decanters that have been used many times have been  preextracted and are safe to use; new ones should either be pretreated to remove  lead from the inner surfaces, or only used for serving, not storing.  The Flavors of Spirits   Spirits are served at temperatures ranging from ice cold  (Swedish   aquavit ) to steaming hot (Calvados). To appreciate nuances of flavor,  they’re best served at room temperature, and if necessary warmed in the hands.  Their aroma is intense, so much so that it can be just as enjoyable to sniff as to sip;  Scotch lovers call this   nosing.   At distilled strengths, alcohol has an irritating and
then numbing effect on the nose that is accentuated at high temperatures. To  reduce   the   interference   of   alcohol   and   bring   out   more   delicate   aromas,  connoisseurs often dilute whiskies with good-quality water to 30% or 20% alcohol.  Different kinds of spirits have very different flavors, which derive from the original  ingredient — grape or grain — from the yeasts and fermentation, from the  prolonged heat of distillation, and from contact with wood and the passage of  time. Spirits with a high fusel oil content have an unctuous quality in the mouth,  while more neutral spirits give a cleansing, drying effect. The aromas of spirits  often persist in the mouth long after the liquid itself has been swallowed.  Kinds of Spirits  Distilled spirits are made all over the world from all kinds of alcoholic liquids. Here  are brief descriptions of the more prominent.  Some Popular Distilled Spirits  The alcohol content after distillation is an indicator of how much flavor is  carried over from the base wine or beer to the spirits. The higher the alcohol  content, the lower the content of other aromatics and the more neutral the  flavor.  Spirit   Original Material  Alcohol Content after  Distillation (percent)   Aging  Brandy   Grapes   Up to 95   Oak barrels  Armagnac   52-65   Oak barrels  Cognac   70   Oak barrels  Grappa,  marc  Grape pomace   70   None  Calvados   Apples   70   Oak barrels  Eaux de  vie  Various fruits   70   None  Whiskies and whiskeys
Spirit   Original Material  Alcohol Content after  Distillation (percent)   Aging  Scotch  malt  Malted barley   70   Used oak  barrels  Grain   Grains, malted  barley  95   Used oak  barrels  Irish   Grains, malted  barley  80   Used oak  barrels  Bourbon   Corn, malted  barley  62-65   Charred new  oak barrels  Canadian   Grains, malted  barley  90   Used oak  barrels  Gin   Grains, malted  barley  95   None  Vodka   Grains, potatoes,  malted barley  95   None  Rum   Molasses   70-90   None/oak  barrels  Tequila   Agave   55   None/oak  barrels  Brandies   Brandies are spirits distilled from grape wine. The two classic brandies  are Cognac and Armagnac, the first named for a town and the second for a region  in southwestern France, each not far from Bordeaux. Both are made from neutral  white grapes (mainly Ugni blanc) that are casually fermented into wine, and the  wines distilled between harvest and mid-spring (the best brandies are distilled  first; as the wine sits, it loses esters and develops volatile acidity and off-aromas).  Cognac is double-distilled from the wine with its yeast lees to an alcohol content  of about 70%, most Armagnac single-distilled without yeast in a traditional  column still to about 55%. Each is then aged in new French oak barrels for a  minimum of six months; some Cognacs are aged for 60 years or more. Before
bottling, each is diluted to about 40% alcohol and may be adjusted with sugar, oak  extract,   and   caramel.   Cognac   has   a   fruity,   flowery   character   thanks   to   the  distillation of esters from the wine yeasts. Armagnac is relatively rough and  complex thanks to its higher content of volatile acids; it’s said to have a prune-like  aroma. With long aging, both develop a prized   rancio   (“rancid”) character from the  transformation   of   fatty   acids   into   methyl   ketones,   which   also   provide   the  distinctive aroma of blue cheese(p. 62).  Less renowned brandies are made elsewhere in France and throughout the world  in a variety of ways, from the industrial to the artisanal. Especially interesting are  brandies distilled from more distinctive grape varieties than the purposely neutral  Ugni blanc.  Food Words   : Aperitif, Digestif  These French words describe two functions attributed to concentrated  alcohols in the Middle Ages, ideas that live on in both the words and drinking  habits.   Aperitif   comes from an Indo-European root meaning “to uncover, to  open,” and is a drink to be had before a meal in order to open our system to  the nourishment to come.   Digestif   comes from an ancient root meaning “to  act, to do,” and names a drink for the end of the meal that will stimulate our  system to assimilate the meal’s nourishment. Research has found that alcohol  does indeed stimulate the secretion of digestive hormones in the stomach.  Eaux de vie, Fruit Alcohols, White Alcohols   These are various terms that are less  confusing than their synonym “fruit brandy”: they name spirits that are distilled  from fermented fresh fruits other than grapes. Unlike true “burned wines,” which  offer a complicated, transformed wineyness, eaux de vie capture and concentrate  the distinctive essence of the fruits from which they’re made, so they can be  savored almost pure rather than in   their flesh. France, Germany, Italy, and  Switzerland are especially noted for their fine fruit alcohols. Some popular  examples   are   apple   (Calvados),   pear   (Poire   Williams),   cherry   (Kirsch),   plum  (Slivovitz, Mirabelle, Quetsch), and raspberry (Framboise); less widely known are  apricot (French Abricot), figs (North African and Middle Eastern   Boukha ), and
watermelon (Russian   Kislav ).  A single bottle of eau de vie may represent from 10 to 30 lb/4.5–13.5 kg of the fruit.  Fruit alcohols are generally double-distilled to about 70% alcohol and are not aged  in barrels — hence their lack of color — because their point is to concentrate the  fruit’s own flavor into an intense, full, but pure essence. One prominent exception  to this rule is Calvados, an apple eau de vie that is distilled in Brittany from a blend  of varieties, some too sour or bitter for eating. The apples are slowly fermented into  cider over the course of several cool weeks in the autumn, and the cider is then  distilled in either pot or column stills, depending on the district. The distillate is  then matured in old barrels for a minimum of two years. Slivovitz, a Balkan plum  alcohol, is also barrel-aged.  Whiskies and Whiskeys   Whiskies (United Kingdom) and whiskeys (elsewhere) are  spirits that have been distilled from fermented grains, mainly barley, maize, rye,  and wheat, and then aged in barrels. The term comes from a barley distillate of  medieval Britain, but is now applied to largely maize distillates in the United States  and Canada, and mixed grain distillates in many countries.  Scotch and Irish Whiskies   There are three kinds of Scotch whisky. One,   malt  whisky,   is made in the Highlands and islands entirely from malted barley. It’s  distilled twice in pot stills to about 70% alcohol, and has a strong, distinctive flavor.  Another,   grain whisky,   is less flavorful and less costly; it is made in the lowlands  from various cereals and just a small portion (10–15%) of malted barley to convert  their starches into sugars, and distilled in a continuous still to a neutral 95%  alcohol. The third and most common is a blend of malt and grain whiskies, with  grain whisky accounting for 40–70%. Such blending began in the 1860s for  economic reasons, and turned out to produce a milder, more widely appealing  drink just in time to replace brandy when the insect scourge phylloxera devastated  European vineyards in the 1870s and 1880s. This is when Scotch developed its  international reputation. Today, Scotch connoisseurs prize the distinctive “single-  malt” whiskies produced by the few remaining small distillers of all-malt whisky.  Whisky makers produce beer, omitting the hops, and then distill it, yeasts and all.  The distillate is aged in used oak barrels for a minimum of three years, then diluted  with water to around 40% alcohol, and is usually chill-filtered. Scotch whisky owes  its special flavor largely to the barley malt. Malt whiskies from Scotland’s west coast  have a unique, smoky flavor that comes from the use of peat fire for drying the
malt, and peaty water for mashing the grain before fermentation. Peat, the mat of  decaying and decayed vegetation that once was the cheapest fuel available in  swampy areas of Britain, contributes volatile organic molecules to the brew that  find their way into the distillate.  Most Irish whisky is made from a mixture of about 40% malted and 60% unmalted  barley. For this reason, and because it is pot-distilled twice and then again in a  column still, Irish whisky is milder than malt Scotch and even some Scotch blends.  American and Canadian Whiskeys   North American whiskeys are produced mainly  from the New World’s indigenous grain, maize. The most prominent corn whiskey  is bourbon, which is named for a county in Kentucky where maize grew well in  colonial times, and where there was abundant water for both mashing the grains  and cooling the distillate.  Bourbon is made from a mash that’s usually 70–80% maize, 10–15% malted barley  to digest the starch, and the remainder rye or wheat. After fermenting for two to  four days, the whole mash, grain residues and yeast included, is distilled in a  column and then a kind of continuous pot still to 60–80% alcohol. The distillate is  aged for at least two years in new, charred American oak barrels, which give  bourbon a deeper color and stronger vanilla note than Scotch whiskies have.  Summer temperatures that can reach 125ºF/53ºC in the warehouses modify and  accelerate the chemical reactions of aging. Bourbons are generally chill-filtered; in  fact this technique was invented by the Tennessee whiskey maker George Dickel  around 1870. Unlike French brandies and Canadian whiskeys, bourbon cannot be  colored, sweetened, or flavored; the only additive allowed is water.  Canadian whiskeys are among the mildest and most delicate of the spirits made  from grains. They are a blend of a light-flavored column-distilled grain whiskey  with small amounts of stronger whiskeys; they can also include wines, rum, and  brandy, up to 9% of the blend. They’re aged for a minimum of three years in used  oak casks.  Gins   There are two principal styles of   distilled   gin made today, English and Dutch,  as well as cheaper gin that cannot be called distilled because its flavorings are  simply added to neutral alcohol.  The traditional Dutch production method is to distill a fermented mixture of malt,  corn, and rye two or three times in pot stills at low proof: that is, the distillate  contains a fair amount of congeners, and resembles a light whisky. Then this
distillate is distilled one last time, to a minimum of 37.5% alcohol, along with  juniper berries and other spices and herbs, whose aromatic molecules end up in  the final gin.  English-style, or “dry” gin, begins with neutral 96% alcohol produced from grain or  molasses by other distilleries. This flavorless liquid is then diluted with water and  redistilled in a pot with juniper and other flavorings. Juniper is required for the  product to be called gin, and most gins also contain coriander. The other  ingredients may include citrus peel and a great variety of spices. This distillate is  diluted before bottling to 37.5 to 47% alcohol.  The primary aromas in gin come from the terpene aromatics (p. 390) in the spices  and herbs, especially notes of pine, citrus, flowers, and wood (pinene, limonene,  linalool, myrcene). Dutch gin is generally enjoyed on its own, while beginning in  the 1890s, English dry gin inspired many cocktails and tall mixed drinks, including  the martini, gimlet, and gin and tonic.  Rums   Rum got its start in the early 17th century as a by-product of sugar making  in the West Indies. Yeasts and other microbes readily grew in the leftover molasses  and wash waters, the yeasts producing alcohol and the bacteria all kinds of  aromatic substances, many of them not pleasant. From this mixed material,  primitive distillation equipment and methods produced a strong, harsh liquid that  was given mainly to slaves and sailors, and traded to Africa for more slaves.  Controlled fermentations and improvements in distilling technology brought more  drinkable rums in the 18th and 19th centuries.  There are now two distinct styles of rum. The modern light style is made by  fermenting a molasses solution with a pure yeast culture for 12–20 hours, then  distilling it to about 95% alcohol in a continuous still, aging it for a few months to  eliminate roughness in the flavor, and diluting and bottling it at around 43%  alcohol. Some light rums are given a brief time in barrels, but then are passed over  charcoal to remove the color and some of the flavor.  Traditional Rums   Traditional rums are made very differently, and have a much  stronger flavor and darker color. Most come from Jamaica and the French-speaking  Caribbean (Martinique, Guadeloupe). They were once fermented for up to two  weeks with a spontaneous group of microbes, and often by adding the already  strong-flavored lees of one fermentation to the next vat. Today, most traditional  rums are fermented for a day or two with mixed microbial cultures dominated by
an unusual yeast ( Schizosaccharomyces ) that excels in ester production. They’re  then pot-distilled to a much lower alcohol content, and therefore end up with four  to five times the quantity of aroma compounds that light rum has. Finally they’re  aged in used American whiskey casks, where they get most of their color. Caramel  can be added to deepen the color and flavor, a procedure that seems appropriate  since rum is made from sugar in the first place.  Rums as Ingredients   Rums are delicious on their own, but it’s their aptitude for  other foods that accounts for much of their popularity. Light rums go well with  tart-sweet fruits and are the base for a number of tropical cocktails, including piña  coladas and daiquiris. Medium and dark rums are a useful ingredient in sweets of  all kinds thanks to their full caramel flavor.  Vodkas   Vodka was first distilled in Russia in medieval times and for medical  purposes, and became a popular drink in the 16th century. Its name means “little  water.” It has traditionally been made from the cheapest source of starch available,  usually grain, but sometimes potatoes and sugarbeets. The source is unimportant,  since the fermented base is distilled to eliminate most aromatics, and the  remainder is removed by filtration through powdered charcoal to produce a  smooth, neutral flavor. The essentially pure mixture of alcohol and water is then  diluted with water to the desired strength, a minimum of around 38%, and bottled  without aging.  Vodka was scarcely known in the United States until the 1950s, when it was  discovered as an ideal alcohol for blending with fruit and other flavors in cocktails  and tall mixed drinks. Recent years have brought vodkas flavored with citrus and  other fruits, with chillis, and with barrel aging.  Grappa, Marc   These are the Italian and French names for spirits distilled from  pomace,   the residue of grape skins and pulp, seeds and stems left behind when  wine grapes are pressed. These drinks were born from frugality, as a way of getting  the most out of the grapes. The solid remains still have juice, sugar, and flavor in  them, so with some water and another period of fermentation, they generate  alcohol and flavors that can then be concentrated by distillation, leaving behind  the harsh astringency and bitterness. Pomace distillates were very much a by-  product, usually distilled just once and often without diverting the heads and tails,  and were bottled as is: so they were strong and harsh, something to warm and  stimulate the vineyard workers, but not something to savor. In the last few
decades, producers have been distilling more selectively and sometimes aging the  results to make a fine drink.  Tequila and Mezcal   These spirits are distilled from the carbohydrate-rich heart of  certain Mexican species of the agave, a succulent plant in the Amaryllis family that  resembles a cactus. Tequila is made mainly by large distilleries around the  northerly city of Jalisco from the blue agave,   Agave tequilana,   while the more rustic  mezcal is made by small producers around central Oaxaca from the maguey,   Agave  angustifolia.  The agave stores its energy in the sugar fructose and the long fructose chains  called inulin (p. 805). Because humans lack an enzyme for digesting inulin, people  have learned to cook inulin-rich foods for a long time at a low temperature, a  treatment that breaks the chains into their component sugars, and also develops  an intense and characteristic browned flavor. Tequila makers steam the inulin-rich  agave hearts, which may weight 20–100 lb/9–45 kg, while mezcal producers roast  them in large charcoalfired pit ovens and generate smoky aromas that carry over  into the spirits. The cooked, sweet hearts are then mashed with water and  fermented,   and   the   resulting   alcoholicliquid   distilled.   Tequila   distillation   is  industrial; mezcal is double-distilled, first in small clay pots, then in a larger metal  pot still. Most tequila and mezcal is bottled without aging.  Tequila and mezcal have distinctive flavors that include roasty aromas, but also  flowery ones (linalool, damascenone, phenylethyl alcohol), and vanilla (vanillin).  Flavored Alcohols: Bitters and Liqueurs   Alcohol’s split chemical personality, its  resemblance to fats as well as water, makes it an excellent solvent for other volatile,  aromatic molecules. It does a good job of extracting and holding flavors from solid  ingredients. Herbs, spices, nuts, flowers, fruits: all these and more are soaked in  alcohol, or distilled along with alcohol, to make a host of flavored liquids. Gin is the  best known of these. Most of the others fall into two families: bitters, which are just  that, and liqueurs, which are sweetened to varying degrees with sugar.  Bitters   Bitters are modern descendents of medicinal herbal brews that were first  made with wine. Purely bitter ingredients include angostura ( Galipea cusparia ), a  South American relative of the citrus family, Chinese rhubarb root, and gentian  ( Gentiana   species); plant materials that are both bitter and aromatic include  wormwood, chamomile, bitter orange peel, saffron, bitter almond, and myrrh  ( Commifera molmol ). Most bitter alcohols are complex mixtures. They may be made
by macerating the plant material or by distilling it along with the source of alcohol.  Among the bitters commonly used today are Angostura and Peychaud’s bitters,  condiment-like 19th century formulations that are added to mixed drinks and  foods as a flavor accent, and such drinkable aperitifs and digestifs as Campari  (unusually sweet) and Fernet Branca.  Some Examples of Flavored Alcohols  Flowers:   Sambuca (elderflower), Gul (rose)  Spices:   Anisette (anise), Pimento (allspice)  Nuts:   Amaretto (almond); Frangelico (hazel); nocino (green walnuts)  Coffee:   Kahlúa, Tia Maria  Chocolate:   Crème de cacao  Fruits:   Cointreau, Curaçao, Grand Marnier, Triple Sec (orange); Midori (melon);  Cassis (black currants); limoncello (lemon); sloe “gin” (plum)  Herbs:   Benedictine, Chartreuse, Jaegermeister, Crème de menthe,  peppermint schnapps  Liqueurs   Liqueurs are a distilled alcohol sweetened with sugar and flavored with  herbs, spices, nuts, or fruits. The flavoring agents may be extracted by soaking in  the distilled alcohol, or they may themselves be distilled along with the alcohol.  Most liqueurs have a neutral grain alcohol as their base, but there are a few whose  base is a brandy or whisky. Examples are Grand Marnier, Cognac plus orange peel;  Dram-buie, Scotch whisky plus honey plus herbs; and Southern Comfort, bourbon  whiskey plus peach brandy and peaches. Some liqueurs include stabilized cream.  Layering Liqueurs  The added sugar that sweetens liqueurs also contributes to their body and  density. And because different liqueurs have different proportions of light
alcohol and dense sugar, they have densities different enough to allow the  mixologist to form distinct layers in the glass, with the densest liqueurs at the  bottom (red grenadine, brown Kahlúa) and the lightest at the top (amber  Cointreau, green Chartreuse). When the liqueurs have different colors and  complementary flavors, this can produce a pleasant novelty drink. Fruit juices  and syrups can also play a part in such constructions. Eventually, adjacent  liquids will diffuse into each other and the layers disappear.  Anise and Caraway Alcohols   These spirits get their dominant flavor from the seeds  of plants in the carrot family, and may be either sweet or dry. Anise is especially  popular; there are French, Greek, Turkish, and Lebanese versions among others  ( pernod   and   anisette, ouzo, raki, araq ). Caraway seeds flavor dry Scandinavian  aquavits and the sweet German   Kümmel.   When clear anise alcohols are diluted  with clear liquid water or ice cubes that melt, the mixture becomes surprisingly  cloudy. This is because the aromatic terpene molecules are insoluble in water, and  soluble in alcohol only when the alcohol is highly concentrated. As the alcohol  becomes diluted, the terpenes separate from the continuous liquid into little  water-avoiding droplets, and these scatter light like the fat globules in milk.  Absinthe  The most notorious herbal alcohol is absinthe, a green-tinged, anise-flavored  liqueur whose main ingredient is parts of the wormwood plant,   Artemisia  absinthium.   Wormwood has a harsh, bitter flavor and carries an aromatic  compound, thujone, that in high doses is toxic not only to intestinal parasites  and insects — hence the plant’s name — but also to the human nervous  system, muscles, and kidneys. Absinthe was hugely popular in late 19th-  century France, and   l’heure verte,   “the green hour” of the afternoon when  people dripped water through a sugar cube into the absinthe and caused it to  cloud up, was depicted by a number of Impressionist painters and by the  young Picasso. Absinthe developed a reputation for inducing convulsions and  insanity, and was therefore outlawed in many countries around 1910, and
replaced by simpler anise-flavored spirits. Whatever toxicity wormwood had  for the heavy drinker was probably exacerbated by absinthe’s high alcohol  content, around 68% and nearly double the strength of most spirits. Absinthe  remains legal in a number of countries and has recently enjoyed a modest  and moderate revival.  Vinegar  Vinegar is alcohol’s fate, the natural sequel to an alcoholic fermentation. Alcohol  makes a liquid more resistant to spoilage because most microbes can’t tolerate it.  But there are a few important and ubiquitous exceptions: bacteria that can use  oxygen to metabolize alcohol and extract energy from it. In the process they  convert it to acetic acid, which is a far more potent antimicrobial agent than  alcohol, and came to be one of the most effective preservatives of ancient and  modern times. Alcoholic wine thus becomes pungently acidic wine: in French,   vin  aigre.  An Ancient Ingredient  Because fermented plant juices naturally turn sour with acetic acid, our ancestors  discovered wine and vinegar together. In fact, a major challenge in winemaking  was   to   delay   this   souring   by   limiting   the   wine’s   exposure   to   the   air. The  Babylonians were making vinegar from date wine, raisin wine, and beer around  4000   BCE . They flavored their vinegar with herbs and spices, used it to pickle  vegetables and meats, and added it to water to make it safe to drink. The Romans  mixed   vinegar   and   water   to   make   an   ordinary   drink   called   posca,   pickled  vegetables in vinegar and brine, and judging by the late Roman recipe book of  Apicius, often enjoyed vinegar in combination with honey. Pliny said that “no other  sauce serves so well to season food or to heighten a flavor.” In the Philippines there  developed a tradition of serving a variety of uncooked fish, meats, and vegetables  in vinegar made from palm sap and tropical fruits. And the Chinese evolved dark,  complex vinegars from rice, wheat, and other grains, which are sometimes roasted  before fermentation.
For millennia, vinegar was made simply by allowing partly filled containers of wine  and other alcoholic liquids to sour, an unpredictable process that took weeks or  months. The first system for more rapid production, a bed of grapevine twigs over  which the wine was regularly poured to aerate it, was invented in France in the  17th century. In the 18th a Dutch scientist, Hermann Boerhaave, introduced the  continuous trickling of wine over an aerating bed. In the 19th century, Louis  Pasteur demonstrated the essential roles of microbes and oxygen in the traditional  Orléans   process   (p.   773).   Modern   methods   for   growing   baker’s   yeast   and  producing penicillin were adapted to vinegar manufacture after World War II, and  now produce finished vinegar in a day or two.  The Virtues of Acetic Acid  Acetic acid contributes two different flavor elements to foods. One is its acidity on  the tongue, and the other is its characteristic aroma in the nose, which can  intensify to a kind of startling pungency, particularly when the vinegar is heated.  The vinegar molecule can exist in two forms: as the intact molecule, and broken  into its main portion and a free hydrogen ion. The hydrogen ion gives the main  impression of acidity, while only the intact molecule is volatile and can escape  from the vinegar or food, travel through the air, and reach the nose. Both the intact  and “dissociated” forms coexist side by side, in proportions that are determined by  their chemical surroundings. If the food is already acidic — thanks to the presence  of tartaric acid in wine vinegar, for example — then less of the acetic acid  dissociates, more is intact and volatile, and the vinegar aroma is stronger.  Acetic acid is an especially effective preserving agent. A solution as weak as 0.1%  — the equivalent of a teaspoon of standard-strength vinegar in a cup of water/5  ml in 250 ml — will inhibit the growth of many microbes.  Acetic acid has a higher boiling point than water, 236ºF/118ºC. This means that  vinegar will get more concentrated if it’s boiled. Because half of its molecule is  more fat-like than water-like, it is a better solvent than water for many chemical  relatives of fats, including the aroma compounds in herbs and spices. This is why  cooks flavor vinegars by steeping herbs and spices in them, and why vinegar can  help remove greasy films from various surfaces.
Food Words:   Vinegar, Acid, Acetic  Though it doesn’t look or sound related, the word   vinegar   comes from the  same root as both   acid   and   acetic : the Indo-European   ak -, meaning “sharp.”  (The   aigre   in   vinaigre   was originally the Latin   acer. ) Edge, acute, acrid, ester,  and oxygen   are related words, oxygen because its presence was once thought  necessary to make an acid.  The Acetic Fermentation  It takes three ingredients to make vinegar: an alcoholic liquid, oxygen, and bacteria  of the genus   Acetobacter   or   Gluconobacter,   mainly   A. pasteurianus   and   A. aceti.  These bacteria are among the few microbes that are able to use alcohol as an  energy source. Their metabolism of alcohol leaves behind two by-products, acetic  acid and water.  CH 3 CH 2 OH + O 2   CH →   3 COOH + H 2 O  Alcohol + oxygen   acetic acid + water →  The intact acetic acid molecule, and the acid dissociated into its acetate and hydrogen  ions. Only the intact molecule is volatile and detectable in the nose by its distinctive  smell. Adding vinegar to an alkaline ingredient — egg whites or baking soda, for  example — causes the acetic acid molecules to dissociate, and diminishes its aroma.  Acetic acid bacteria require oxygen, and so live on the surface of the fermenting  liquid, where with other microbes they form a film sometimes called the “mother.”  Especially thick films are created by   Acetobacter xylinum,   which secretes a form of  cellulose. (Such mats are sometimes cultivated and eaten for themselves; see p.
509.) Acetobacteria thrive in warm conditions, so vinegar fermentations are often  carried out at relatively high temperatures, from 82 to 104ºF/28–40ºC.  The concentration of alcohol in the starting liquid affects the acetic fermentation  and the stability of the resulting vinegar. An alcohol concentration around 5% will  produce a vinegar that is around 4% acetic acid, which is strong enough to prevent  the vinegar solution itself from spoiling. Above 5% alcohol, the resulting vinegar  will be stronger in acetic acid and so more stable, but the fermentation proceeds  more slowly because the high alcohol levels inhibit the activity of the bacteria. For  this reason, and to minimize residual alcohol in the finished vinegar, wines of 10–  12% alcohol are usually diluted with water before acetic fermentation. However  this also dilutes the wine’s flavorful components; so patient vinegar makers may  still choose to ferment their wine straight.  Vinegar Production  There are three standard ways of producing vinegar in the West.  The Orléans Process   The simplest, oldest, and slowest method was perfected in  the Middle Ages in the French city of Orléans, where spoiled barrels of Bordeaux  and Burgundy wine on their way to Paris were identified and salvaged as vinegar.  In the Orléans process, wood barrels are partly filled with diluted wine, inoculated  with a mother from a previous batch, and allowed to ferment. Periodically, some  vinegar is drawn off and replaced by new wine. This method is slow, because the  transformation of alcohol to acetic acid is limited to the wine surface exposed to  the air. But the slow fermentation leaves time for reactions among the alcohol,  acetic acid, and other molecules, and produces the finest flavor. When optimized,  this process can yield a barrel full of vinegar in two months.  Streamlined   Trickling   and   Submerged   Cultures   In   the   second, “trickling”  method, the wine is poured repeatedly over a porous, air-rich matrix — wood  shavings, or a synthetic material — onto which the acetic bacteria cling. This  greatly increases the effective surface area of the wine, and regularly exposes all  parts of the liquid to both oxygen and bacteria. The result is a quick fermentation  that takes only a few days. Finally, there is the “submerged culture” method, in  which free-swimming bacteria are supplied oxygen in the form of air that is  bubbled through the tank. This industrial method converts the liquid’s alcohol into  acetic acid in 24–48 hours.
After Fermentation   After fermentation, nearly all vinegars are pasteurized at 150–  160ºF/65–70ºC   to   kill   remaining   bacteria   of   all   kinds,   but   especially   the  acetobacteria themselves, which respond to the disappearance of the alcohol by  metabolizing acetic acid to water and carbon dioxide and thus weakening the  vinegar. Most vinegars are aged for a few months, a period in which their flavor  becomes less harsh and more mellow, thanks in part to the combination of acetic  and other acids with various compounds to form new, less pungent, often  aromatic substances.  Common Kinds of Vinegar  Cooks can choose among several different kinds of vinegar. Though all have the  basic aroma and pungency of acetic acid, each is distinctive, because they’re made  with different starting materials, and may or may not be matured in wood.  Wine Vinegars   Wine vinegars are made from a base of yeast-fermented grape  juice. They therefore have a winey character from the aromatic and savory by-  products of the yeast fermentation. Interestingly prominent in wine and cider  vinegars are buttery aroma compounds (diacetyl, butyric acid). Balsamic and  sherry vinegars are specialized versions of wine vinegar (see pp. 775–776).  Cider Vinegars   Cider vinegar is made from a base of yeast-fermented apple juice.  It therefore includes some of the characteristic aroma components of apples, and  others that are especially accentuated in apple fermentation; these include the  volatile phenols that give animal and stable aromas to grape wines (ethyl guaiacol  and ethyl phenol, p. 738). Apples are rich in malic acid, so cider vinegars undergo a  malolactic fermentation (p. 730) that may augment aroma while softening acidity.  Thanks to its pulp and tannin content, cider vinegar often becomes cloudy with  tannin-protein complexes.  Fruit Vinegars   Fruit vinegars may simply be ordinary vinegars flavored by contact  with fresh fruit, including apples, but they’re also made by fermenting the fresh  fruit juices. Pineapple and coconut vinegars are examples. Fruit vinegars are  interesting for their expression of the fruit’s flavor through the alcoholic and acetic  fermentations.  Malt Vinegars   Malt vinegar is essentially made from unhopped beer: that is, from  cereal grains and sprouted barley. It has overtones of barley malt. This was the  standard form of vinegar in beer-drinking Britain, where it was originally called
alegar.  Making Vinegars in the Kitchen  Cooks can easily make their own vinegars from leftover wine or from fruits of  their own choosing. A few guidelines will improve the odds of getting a good  result. Sweet liquids will become alcoholic and sour spontaneously, but “wild”  microbes may produce off-flavors. This possibility is minimized by starting  with a cultured yeast and a vinegar “mother” from an active vinegar crock or  commercial source. The warmer the temperature (up to around 85ºF/30ºC)  and the larger the surface area exposed to the air, the faster the liquid will  acetify. Fruits with less than about 10% sugar in their juices will produce less  than 5% alcohol and thus less than 4% acetic acid in the final vinegar, which  will be prone to spoiling. Such fruits should be supplemented with table  sugar, which boosts the subsequent alcohol and acetic acid levels.  Asian Vinegars   Asian rice and grain vinegars are made from grains whose starch is  broken down to sugars by means of a mold culture rather than sprouted grains (p.  753). Chinese vinegars can be especially flavorful and savory because they’re made  from whole, sometimes roasted grains, fermented in continuous contact with the  grain solids, and often aged in contact with the molds, yeasts, and bacteria, all of  which release amino and other organic acids and other flavor compounds into the  vinegar.  White Vinegars   White vinegar is among the purest sources of acetic acid. It’s made  by acetic fermentation of pure alcohol that has been either distilled or synthesized  from natural gas, and is not aged in or softened by contact with wood. It contains  few or none of the aromatic and savory byproducts of the alcoholic fermentation.  In the United States, more white vinegar is made than any other kind. It’s used  mainly in the manufacture of pickles, salad dressings, and mustards.  Distilled Vinegars   Distilled vinegar in the United States is white vinegar made  with distilled alcohol; in the United Kingdom, it’s vinegar that is made by acetic  fermentation of unhopped beer, and then distilled to concentrate the acetic acid.  Vinegar Strength   When developing and following recipes in which vinegar is a
prominent ingredient, cooks should take care to note not only the kind of vinegar,  but also the strength, which is usually indicated on the label. In the United States,  most industrially produced vinegars are adjusted to 5% acetic acid, but many wine  vinegars are 7% or even stronger. Mild Japanese rice vinegars, by contrast, may be  4% (the U.S. minimum), black Chinese vinegars as little as 2%. A spoonful may thus  provide half as much acetic acid as expected, or twice as much, depending on the  vinegars that are called for and actually used.  Balsamic Vinegar  True balsamic vinegar,   aceto balsamico,   is a vinegar like no other: almost black in  color, syrupy, sweet, remarkably complex in flavor, and remarkably expensive, all  thanks to decades-long fermentation, aging, and concentration in wood casks. It  has been made in the northern Italian state of Emilia-Romagna since medieval  times. Individual households produced their own as a kind of general-purpose,  soothing tonic, or balsam. It wasn’t until the 1980s that the rest of the world  discovered balsamic vinegar, a discovery that fostered the development of less  elaborate and less costly approximations. The label term   tradizionale,   “traditional,”  is reserved for the original version.  Using Balsamic Vinegar  Traditional balsamic vinegar is applied by the drop to a variety of dishes, from  salads and grilled meats and fish to fruits and cheese. Mass-produced versions  are added in larger quantities to lend depth of flavor to soups and stews, and  to make mellower vinaigrette dressings than plain wine vinegar does.  Making Traditional Balsamic Vinegar   Traditional balsamic vinegar begins with  wine grapes: white Trebbiano, red Lambrusco, and a number of other varieties are  used. Their juice is boiled until the volume is reduced by about a third. Boiling  removes enough water to concentrate the juice to around 40% dissolved sugars  and acids, and begins the sequence of browning reactions between sugars and  proteins that generate both rich flavor and color (p. 778). The juice is then placed in  the first of a sequence of progressively smaller barrels, often made from a variety
of woods (oak, chestnut, cherry, juniper), which are kept in an attic or other  location where they’re exposed to the variations and extremes of the local climate.  In summer heat, the concentrated sugars and amino acids react with each other to  produce aroma molecules more commonly found in roasted and browned foods,  and the fermentation products and by-products react with each other to form a  heady mixture. As evaporation continues to remove water and concentrate the  must (about 10% of the barrel disappears each year), each barrel is replenished  with must from the next younger barrel. Finished vinegar, whose average age must  be a minimum of 12 years, is removed from the oldest barrel. According to one  estimate, it takes about 70 lb/36 kg of grapes to make 1 cup/250 ml of traditional  balsamic vinegar.  Notice that there’s no initial alcoholic fermentation before the acetification begins.  Instead, a mixed culture of yeasts and bacteria simultaneously converts a portion  of the abundant grape sugars into alcohol, and that alcohol into acetic acid. These  conversions proceed slowly, over the course of several years, because the high  concentration of grape sugars and acids inhibits the growth of all microbes. The  alcoholic fermentation is carried out by unusual yeasts,   Zygosaccharomyces bailii   or  bisporus,   that are adapted to surviving in environments high in sugars and in acetic  acid. At the same time that the two fermentations take place, so do the processes  of maturation and aging.  In the end, traditional balsamic vinegar may contain anywhere from 20 to 70%  unfermented sugars, about 8% acetic and 4% tartaric, malic, and other nonvolatile  acids, an aroma-enhancing 1% alcohol, and up to 12% glycerol, a product of the  yeast fermentation that contributes to the velvety viscosity.  The “condiment” grades of balsamic vinegar are made much more rapidly than the  traditional grade, and are far less concentrated and fine-flavored. The better mass-  produced vinegars include some cooked-down grape must and young balsamic  vinegar, and are aged for a year or so. Cheap balsamic vinegars are no more than  ordinary wine vinegar colored with caramel and sweetened with sugar.  Sherry Vinegar  A style of vinegar that lies somewhere between ordinary wine vinegar and  balsamic vinegar is the solera-aged sherry vinegar of Spain. This starts from the  young sherry wine, which contains no residual sugar. Like sherry wines and
balsamic vinegars, sherry vinegar is blended with older batches and matured for  years   or   decades   in   a   series   of   partly-filled   barrels.   The   concentration   by  evaporation, and extended contact with microbes and wood, leave sherry vinegar  with high levels of savory amino acids and organic acids, and viscous glycerol. In  old soleras, the acetic acid concentration can reach 10% and more. Sherry vinegar  isn’t as dark and savory as balsamic vinegar, but is noticeably more intense and  nutty than other wine vinegars.   Object 13
Cooking Methods and Utensil Materials  Each of the basic methods of cooking, from grilling over a fire to irradiating in a  microwave oven, has its own particular influence on food. This chapter briefly  explains how these methods work, and describes the properties of the various  metal and ceramic utensils we use to heat foods.  First, though, it’s good to consider an important transformation that foods  undergo when they’re subjected to sufficient heat, no matter what the cooking  method. The browning reactions come up in every chapter this book. They have  remarkable effects on both the flavor and appearance of a host of foods, from  condensed milk to grilled meats, from chocolate to beer.  Browning Reactions and Flavor  While the chemical changes caused by moderate heat modify or intensify flavors  that are intrinsic to a food, the browning reactions produce new flavors, flavors  that are characteristic of the cooking process. These reactions are named for the  typical colors that they also create, which may actually range from yellow to red to  black, depending on the conditions.  Caramelization  The simplest browning reaction is the caramelization of sugar, and it’s not simple  at all (p. 656). When we heat plain table sugar, essentially just molecules of sucrose,  it first melts into a thick syrup, then slowly changes color, becoming light yellow  and progressively deepening to a dark brown. At the same time, its flavor, initially  sweet and odorless, develops acidity, some bitterness, and a rich aroma. The  chemical reactions involved in this transformation are many, and they result in the  formation of hundreds of different reaction products, among them sour organic  acids, sweet and bitter derivatives, many fragrant volatile molecules, and brown-  colored polymers. It’s a remarkable change, and a fortunate one: it contributes to  the pleasures of many candies and other sweets.
The Maillard Reactions  Even more fortunate and complex are the reactions responsible for the cooked  color and flavor of bread crusts, chocolate, coffee beans, dark beers, and roasted  meats, all foods that are   not   primarily sugar. These are known as the Maillard  reactions, after Louis Camille Maillard, a French physician, who discovered and  described them around 1910. The sequence begins with the reaction of a  carbohydrate molecule (a free sugar or one bound up in starch; glucose and  fructose are more reactive than table sugar) and an amino acid (free or part of a  protein chain). An unstable intermediate structure is formed, and this then  undergoes further changes, producing hundreds of different by-products. Again, a  brown coloration and full, intense flavor result. Maillard flavors are more complex  and meaty than caramelized flavors, because the involvement of the amino acids  adds nitrogen and sulfur atoms to the mix of carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen, and  produces new families of molecules and new aromatic dimensions (see illustration  below, and box, p. 779).  Representative aroma molecules produced by caramelization (left; see p. 656) and by  the Maillard reactions between carbohydrates and amino acids(right). Amino acids  contribute nitrogen and sulfur atoms to produce the distinctive central rings of  (clockwise from top) pyrroles, pyridines, pyrazines, thiophenes, thiazoles, and oxazoles.  Each ring can be augmented with other structures attached to the carbon atoms.  Maillard products have a range of qualities, from leafy and floral to earthy and meaty.
Some of the Flavors Produced by Caramelization and Maillard Browning  Caramelization  330ºF/165ºC and above  Maillard Reactions  250ºF/120ºC and above  Sweet (sucrose, other sugars)   Savory (peptides, amino acids)  Sour (acetic acid)   Floral (oxazoles)  Bitter (complex molecules)   Onions, meatiness (sulfur compounds)  Fruity (esters)   Green vegetables (pyridines, pyrazines)  Sherry-like (acetaldehyde)   Chocolate (pyrazines)  Butterscotch (diacetyl)   Potato, earthy (pyrazines)  Caramel (maltol)  Nutty (furans)   Plus caramelization flavors  High Temperatures and Dry Cooking Methods  Both caramelization and Maillard browning proceed at a rapid rate only at  relatively high temperatures. Caramelization in table sugar becomes noticeable at  around 330ºF/165ºC, Maillard browning perhaps 100ºF/50ºC below that. Large  amounts of energy are required to force the initial molecular interactions. The  practical consequence of this is that most foods brown only on the outside and  during the application of dry heat. The temperature of water can’t rise above  212ºF/100ºC until it is vaporized (unless it’s under high pressure in a pressure  cooker). So foods that are cooked in hot water or steamed, and the moist interiors  of meats and vegetables, will never exceed 212ºF. But the outer surfaces of foods  cooked in oil or in an oven quickly dehydrate and reach the temperature of their  surroundings, perhaps 300 to 500ºF/159–260ºC. So it is that foods cooked by  “moist” techniques — boiling, steaming, braising — are generally pale and mild  compared to the same foods cooked by “dry” methods — grilling, baking, frying.  This is a useful rule to keep in mind. For example, one key to a rich-tasting stew is  to brown the meat, vegetables, and flour quite well by frying them before adding  any liquid. On the other hand, if you want to emphasize the intrinsic flavors of the  foods, avoid the high temperatures that create the intense but less individualized
browning flavors.  Slow Browning in Moist Foods  There are exceptions to the rule that browning reactions require temperatures  above the boil. Alkaline conditions, concentrated solutions of carbohydrates and  amino acids, and prolonged cooking times can all generate Maillard colors and  aromas in moist foods. For example, alkaline egg whites, rich in protein, with a  trace of glucose, but 90% water, will become tan-colored when simmered for 12  hours. The base liquid for brewing beer, a water extract of barley malt that contains  reactive sugars and amino acids from the germinated grains, deepens in color and  flavor with several hours of boiling. Watery meat or chicken stock will do the same  as it’s boiled down to make a concentrated demiglace. Persimmon pudding turns  nearly black thanks to its combination of reactive glucose, alkaline baking soda,  and hours of cooking; balsamic vinegar turns nearly black over the course of years!  Drawbacks of the Browning Reactions  Browning reactions do have some drawbacks. First, many dehydrated fruits are  prone to gradual browning over weeks or months at room temperature, because  the carbohydrates and amine-containing molecules are especially concentrated  (browning caused by enzymes can also be a factor). Small amounts of sulfur  dioxide are commonly added to these foods to block these unwanted changes in  color and taste. Second, the nutritional value of the foods is slightly reduced  because amino acids are altered or destroyed.  Finally, there’s evidence that some products of the browning reactions can damage  DNA and may cause cancer. In 2002, Swedish researchers found worrisome levels  of acrylamide, a known carcinogen in rats, in potato chips, french fries, and other  starchy fried foods, apparently the product of reactions between sugars and the  amino acid asparagine. The health significance of this and similar findings remains  unclear. The ubiquity of browned foods, both today and through thousands of  years of history, would suggest that they do not constitute a major threat to public  health. And other browning-reaction products have been found to protect against  DNA damage! But it’s probably prudent to make charred meats and fried snacks  occasional pleasures, not everyday ones.
Forms of Heat Transfer  Cooking can be defined in a general way as the transformation of raw foods into  something different. Most often, we transform foods by heating them — by  transferring energy from a heat source into the foods, so that the food molecules  move faster and faster, collide harder and harder, and react to form new structures  and flavors. Our various cooking methods — boiling, broiling, baking, frying, and  so on — achieve their various effects by employing very different materials as the  medium through which the heat moves, and by drawing on different forms of heat  transfer. There are three ways to transfer heat, and an acquaintance with them will  help us understand how particular cooking techniques affect foods the way they  do.  Conduction: Direct Contact  When thermal energy is exchanged from one particle to a nearby one by means of  a collision or a movement that induces movement (for example, through electrical  attraction or repulsion), the process is called   conduction.   Though it’s the most  straightforward means of heat transfer in matter, conduction takes different forms  in different materials. For example, metals are usually good conductors of heat  because, while their atoms are fixed in a lattice-like structure, some of their  electrons are very loosely held and tend to form a free-moving “fluid” or “gas” in the  solid that can carry energy from one region to another. This same electron mobility  makes metals good electrical conductors. But in nonmetallic solids like ceramics,  conduction is more mysterious. It seems that heat is propagated not by the  movement   of   energetic   electrons   —   in   solids   of   ionic-or   covalent-bonded  compounds, the electrons are not free to move — but by the vibration of  individual molecules or a portion of the lattice, which is transferred to neighboring  areas. This transfer of vibration is a much slower and less efficient process than  electron movement, and nonmetals are therefore usually referred to as thermal or  electrical   insulators,   rather than conductors. Liquids and gases, because their  molecules are relatively far apart, are very poor conductors.  The conductivity of a material determines its behavior on the stove. The better the  conductor, the faster a pan heats up and cools off, and the more evenly heat is  distributed across the pan bottom. Uneven heating creates hot spots that can burn  foods: during frying, for example, or the boiling down of a puree or sauce.
Conduction Within a Food   Heat also travels from the outside to the center of a  solid piece of food — a piece of meat or fish or vegetable — by means of  conduction. Because the cellular structure of foods impedes the movement of heat  energy, foods behave more like insulators than like metals, and heat up relatively  slowly. One of the keys to good cooking is knowing how to heat a food to the  desired doneness at its center without overheating its outer regions. This is not a  simple task, because different kinds of foods heat through at different rates. One of  the most important variables is the thickness of the food. Though common sense  might suggest that a piece of meat one inch thick would take twice as long to cook  through as a half-inch piece, it turns out that it takes somewhere between twice  and four times longer, depending on the overall shape: less for a compact chop or  chunk, more for a broad steak or fillet. There’s no absolutely reliable way to predict  how long it will take heat to move from the food surface to its center, so the best  rule is to check the doneness frequently.  Convection: Movement in Fluids  In the form of heat transfer called   convection,   heat is transferred by the movement  of molecules in a fluid from a warm region to a cooler one. The fluid may be a  liquid such as water, or it may be the air or other gases. Convection is a process  that combines conduction and mixing: energetic molecules move from one point  in space to another, and then collide with slower particles. Convection is an  influential phenomenon, contributing as it does to winds, storms, ocean currents,  the heating of our homes, and the boiling of water on the stove. It occurs because  air and water take up more space — become less dense — when their molecules  absorb energy and move faster, and so they rise when they heat up and sink again  as they cool off.  Radiation: the Pure Energy Of radiant Heat and Microwaves  We all know that the earth is warmed by the sun. How does solar energy reach us  across millions of miles of nearly empty space, where there’s nothing there to  conduct or convect? The answer is thermal   radiation,   a process that does not  require direct physical contact between heat source and object. All matter emits  thermal radiation all the time, though normally we can detect it only when  something is very hot. The warmth we feel from sunlight or a stove burner comes
from thermal radiation. It’s emitted by atoms and molecules which, having  absorbed energy, release it again not in the form of faster movement, but as waves  of pure energy.  Radiant Heat Is Invisible “Infrared” Radiation   As unlikely as it may seem,  radiated heat is close kin to radio waves, microwaves, visible light, and X rays. Each  of these phenomena is a part of the   electromagnetic spectrum,   waves of varying  energies created by the movement of electrically charged particles, often electrons  within atoms. Such movement creates electrical and magnetic fields that radiate,  or spread out, as waves. And conversely, when such energetic waves hit other  atoms, they cause increased movement in those atoms. One of the first to  recognize that heat radiation is related to light was the English oboist and  astronomer William Herschel, who noticed in 1800 that if a thermometer was  moved from one end of a prism-produced light spectrum to the other, the highest  temperatures would register below the red band, where no light was visible.  Because of its position in the spectrum, heat radiation is called   infrared (infra   is  Latin for “below”).  Different Kinds of Radiation Carry Different Amounts of Energy   Different kinds  of radiation carry different energies, and the energy of a given kind of radiation  determines the kind of effect that it will have.  •   At the bottom end of the scale, radio waves are so weak that they can only  cause increased movement in free electrons. This is why metal antennas and  their mobile electrons are necessary to transmit and receive such radiation.  •   Next come microwaves, which are energetic enough to set polar molecules  like water moving faster. ( Microwave   refers to the fact that their wavelength  is shorter than radio wavelengths.) Since most foods are mostly water  molecules, microwave radiation is an effective means of cooking.  •   Then there’s heat radiation, the cook’s standard energy source, which causes  the increased movement of nonpolar molecules — including carbohydrates,  proteins, and fats — as well as polar water.  •   Visible and ultraviolet light is capable of altering the orbits of electrons  bound in molecules, and so can initiate chemical reactions that cause  damage to pigments and fats and the development of stale, rancid flavors.  Visible and ultraviolet rays from the sun can ruin the flavor of milk and beer,  and ultraviolet rays can burn our skin, damage our DNA, and cause cancer.  •   X and gamma rays penetrate matter and   ionize   it, or strip electrons from its
molecules. Along with controlled beams of certain subatomic particles, they  damage DNA and kill microbes, and are used to “cold-pasteurize” and  sterilize some foods.  The spectrum of electromagnetic radiation. We use both microwave and infrared  radiation to cook our foods. (The scale employs a standard scientific abbreviation for  large numbers; 10 5 means a 1 followed by 5 zeroes, or 100,000.)  Useful   Heat   Radiation   Is   Generated   by   High   Temperatures   Because   all  molecules are vibrating to some extent, everything around us is emitting at least  some infrared radiation all the time. The hotter an object gets, the more energy it  radiates in higher regions of the spectrum. So it is that glowing metal is hotter than  metal that does not radiate visible light, and that yellow-hot metal is hotter than  red-hot. It turns out that the rate of infrared radiation is relatively low below about  1,800ºF/980ºC, or the point at which objects begin to glow visibly red. Cooking by  radiation is thus a slow process except at very high cooking temperatures, those  characteristic of grilling and broiling near glowing coals, electrical elements, or gas  flames. At typical baking and frying temperatures, conduction and convection  tend to be more significant than infrared radiation. But as the oven temperature  goes up, the proportion of heat contributed by the radiating oven walls goes up  with it. The cook can control this contribution by moving the food close to the  walls or ceiling to increase it, or shielding the food with reflective foil, which  reduces it.
Induction Cooking  An innovative version of heating with electromagnetic radiation is induction  heating. It’s an alternative to the stovetop burner or electrical element, and  heats the pot that then heats the food. In induction heating, the heating  element, under a ceramic cook-top surface, is a wire coil through which a  rapidly alternating electrical current flows (between 25,000 and 40,000 cycles  per second). The current causes the coil to generate a magnetic field that  extends some distance from the coil, and that alternates at the same rate. If a  pot made from a magnetic material — cast iron, steel, stainless steel of the  proper crystal structure (ferritic) — is placed near the coil, then the alternating  magnetic field   induces   an alternating electrical current in the pot. That is, it  causes electrons to move in the pot, and that movement rapidly generates  heat.  Induction heating has two notable advantages over burners and radiant  elements. Like microwave heating, it’s more efficient, because all the energy  goes into the object to be heated, not into the surrounding air. And only the  pot and its contents get very hot. The ceramic surface above the induction  coil is heated only indirectly by the pot, because its electrons aren’t free to be  moved by the magnetic field.  Basic Methods of Heating Foods  Pure examples of the three different forms of heat transfer are seldom found in  everyday life. All hot utensils radiate heat to some degree, and cooks usually work  with combinations of solid containers that conduct and fluids that circulate. As  simple an operation as heating a pan of water on the stove involves radiation and  conduction from an electrical element (radiation and convection from a gas flame),  conduction through the pan, and convection in the water. Still, one kind of heat  transfer usually predominates in a given cooking technique and, together with the  cooking medium, has a distinctive influence on foods.
Grilling and Broiling: Infrared Radiation  Grilling and broiling are the modern, controlled versions of the oldest culinary  technique, roasting over an open fire or glowing coals. In grilling, the heat source is  below the food; in broiling, above. Though air convection contributes some heat,  especially as the distance between heat source and food is increased, broiling is  largely a matter of infrared radiation. The heat sources used in these techniques all  emit visible light and so are also intense radiators of infrared energy. Glowing coals  or   the   nickel-chrome   alloys   used   in   electrical   appliances   reach   about  2,000ºF/1,100ºC, and a gas flame is closer to 3,000ºF/1,600ºC. The walls of an oven,  by contrast, rarely exceed 500ºF/250ºC. The total amount of energy radiated by a  hot object is proportional to the fourth power of the absolute temperature, so that  a coal or metal rod at 2,000ºF is radiating more than 40 times as much energy as  the equivalent area of oven wall at 500ºF.  This tremendous amount of heat is at once the great advantage and the principal  challenge of grilling and broiling. On one hand, it makes possible a rapid and  thorough browning of the surface, and so produces intense flavors. On the other,  there’s a huge disparity between the rate of heat radiation at the surface and the  rate of heat conduction within the food. This is why it’s so easy to end up with a  steak that’s charred on the outside and cold at the center.  The key to grilling and broiling is to position the food far enough from the heat  source to match the browning rate with the inner conduction rate, or to brown the  surface well with intense heat, and then move the food to finish cooking through  with a more distant or weaker heat source. This might be a spot on the grill with  fewer coals below, or a moderate oven.  Baking: Air Convection and Radiation  When we bake a food, we surround it with a hot enclosure, the oven, and rely on a  combination of radiation from the walls and hot-air convection to heat the food.  Baking easily dehydrates the surface of foods, and so will brown them well  provided the oven temperature is high enough. Typical baking temperatures are  well above the boiling point, from 300 to 500ºF/150–250ºC), and yet baking is  nowhere near as efficient a means of heat transfer as is boiling. A potato can be  boiled in less time than it takes to be baked at a much hotter temperature. This is  so because neither radiation nor air convection at 500ºF transfers heat very rapidly
to food. Oven air is less than a thousandth as dense as water, so the collisions  between hot molecules and food are much less frequent in the oven than in the  pot (this is why we can reach into a hot oven without immediately burning our  hand).   Convection ovens   increase the rate of heat transfer by using fans to force  more air movement, and significantly reduce baking times.  Because baking requires a fairly sophisticated container, it was probably a late  addition to the culinary repertoire. The earliest ovens seem to have accompanied  the refinement of bread making around 3000   BCE   in Egypt; they were hollow cones  of clay that contained a layer of coals, with the bread stuck onto an inside wall. As a  relatively compact metal box easily installed in individual homes, the modern oven  dates from the late 19th century. Before then, most meat cooking was done over  the fire.  Boiling and Simmering: Water Convection  In boiling and its lower-temperature versions, simmering and poaching, food is  heated by the convection currents in hot water. The maximum temperature  possible is the boiling point, 212ºF/100ºC at sea level, which is usually not high  enough for these “moist” cooking methods to trigger browning reactions. Despite  the relatively low cooking temperature, boiling is a very efficient process. The  entire surface of the food is in contact with the cooking medium, and water is  dense enough that its molecules constantly collide with the food and rapidly  impart their energy to it.  As a cooking technique, boiling probably followed roasting and preceded baking.  It requires containers that are both water-and fireproof, and so probably had to  await the development of pottery, around 10,000 years ago.  The Boiling Point: A Reliable Landmark   It isn’t always easy for the cook to  recognize and maintain a particular cooking temperature, and reproduce the same  temperature reliably. Thermostats, thermometers, and our senses are all fallible. So  one of the great advantages of water as a cooking medium is that its boiling point  is constant — 212ºF/100ºC at sea level — and it’s instantly recognizable. The sure  sign of boiling water is bubbling. Why? When the water in a pan is heated near  boiling, molecules at the bottom, where the pan is hottest, vaporize and become  steam, and form regions that are less dense than the surrounding liquid. (The small  bubbles that form very early on are pockets of air that had been dissolved in the
cold water but became less soluble as the temperature rose.) Because all the pan  heat at the boil goes into vaporizing the liquid water, the temperature of the water  itself stays the same (p. 816). It’s only slightly higher at a full, rolling boil than in a  gently bubbling pot, and will not get any higher until the phase change from  liquid to gas has been completed.  The Boiling Point Depends on Elevation   The boiling point of water is constant  given a constant physical environment, but it varies from place to place and even  in the same place. The boiling point of any liquid depends on the atmospheric  pressure bearing down on its surface: the higher the pressure, the more energy it  takes for liquid molecules to escape the surface and become a gas, and so the  higher the temperature at which the liquid boils. Every 1,000 feet/305 meters in  elevation above sea level lowers the boiling point about 2ºF below the standard  212ºF (or 1ºC below 100ºC). And food takes longer to cook at 200º than it does at  212º. Even a low-pressure weather front can lower the boiling point, or a high-  pressure front raise it, by as much as a degree or two.  Pressure Cooking: Raising the Boiling Point   The same principal is put to use to  speed   cooking in the pressure cooker. This appliance reduces cooking times by  trapping the steam that escapes from boiling water, thereby increasing the  pressure   on   the   liquid,   and   so   raising   its   boiling   point   —   and   maximum  temperature — to about 250ºF/120ºC. This is the equivalent of boiling water in an  open pan at the bottom of a pit 19,000 feet/5,800 meters   below   sea level.  The pressure cooker was invented by the French physician Denis Papin in the 17th  century.  The Boiling Point Is Increased by Dissolved Sugar and Salt   When salt, sugar, or  any other water-soluble substance is added to pure water, the boiling point of the  resulting solution becomes higher than the boiling point of water, and the freezing  point lower than water’s freezing point. Both effects are due to the fact that the  water molecules are diluted by the dissolved particles, which interfere with the  water molecules as they change phase from liquid to gas or liquid to solid. In the  case of the boiling point, the solution contains sugar molecules or salt ions that  also absorb heat energy, but cannot themselves turn into a gas. So at water’s  normal boiling point, there is a smaller proportion of molecules with enough  energy to escape from the liquid and form a bubble of vapor, and the cook has to  add more energy than usual in order to get those bubbles to form. The boiling
point and freezing point rise and fall predictably as the concentration of dissolved  sugar or salt increases, a fact that is handy for making both sugar candies and ice  creams.  It’s true that adding salt to water raises its boiling point, and so speeds cooking.  However, it takes one ounce of salt in a quart of water — around the salinity of the  ocean — to raise the boiling point a negligible 1ºF. A Denverite who wanted to boil  water at the same temperature as someone in Boston would have to add more  than half a pound of salt to that quart of liquid (225 grams to a liter).  Cooking Below the Boil   Though the boil is a handy temperature landmark, it’s not  necessarily the best temperature at which to cook foods in water. Fish and many  meats develop an ideal texture at temperatures around 140ºF/60ºC. If they’re  cooked in boiling water, which is 70ºF hotter, then the outer portions of the food  overcook and dry out while the interior heats through. Lower water temperatures  reduce this overcooking, though they also prolong cooking times. A water  temperature of 180ºF/80ºC, verified by thermometer, offers a good compromise  between gentle and efficient cooking.  Steaming: Heating by Vapor condensation and Convection  Though it’s less dense than liquid water and so makes less frequent contact with  the food, steam compensates for this loss in efficiency with a gain in energy. It  takes a large amount of energy to turn liquid water into a gas, and conversely  gaseous water releases that same large amount of energy when it condenses onto  a cooler object. So molecules of steam don’t just impart their energy of motion to  the food; they impart their energy of vaporization also. This means that steaming  does an especially quick job of bringing the surface of the food up to the boiling  point, and an effective job of keeping it there.  Pan-Frying and Sautéing: Conduction  Frying and sautéing are methods that heat foods for the most part by conduction  from a hot, oiled pan, with temperatures between 350 and 450ºF/175–225ºC that  encourage Maillard browning and flavor development. The fat or oil has several  roles to play: it brings the uneven surface of the food into uniform contact with the  heat source, it lubricates and prevents sticking, and it supplies some flavor. As is  true in broiling, the trick in frying is to prevent the outside from overcooking
before   the   inside   is   done. The   surface   is   quickly   dehydrated   by   the   high  temperatures — odd as it sounds, frying in oil is a “dry” technique — while the  interior remains largely water and never exceeds 212ºF/100ºC. In order to reduce  the disparity between outer and inner cooking times, we generally fry only thin  cuts of food. It’s also common practice to fry meats at a high initial temperature —  to sear them — in order to accomplish the browning, and then to reduce the heat  while the interior heats through. Yet another way to avoid overcooking the outer  portions of the food is to coat it in another material that develops pleasant flavors  when fried, and acts as a kind of insulation to protect the inner food from direct  contact with high heat. Breadings and batters are such insulators.  How far back frying goes is hard to tell. The rules for sacrifice in Leviticus 2, which  dates from about 600   BCE , distinguish between bread baked in an oven and cooked  “on the griddle” or “in the pan.” Pliny, in the 1st century   CE , records a prescription for  spleen disease that calls for eggs steeped in vinegar and then fried in oil. And by  Chaucer’s time, the 14th century, frying was common enough to serve as a colorful  metaphor. The Wife of Bath says of her fourth husband  That in his owene grece I made hym frye  For angre, and for verray jalousye.  By God! in erthe I was his purgatorie,  For which I hope his soule be in glorie.  Deep Frying: Oil Convection  Deep frying differs from pan frying by employing enough oil to immerse the food  altogether. As a technique, it resembles boiling more than pan frying, with the  essential difference that the oil is heated far above the boiling point of water, and  so will dehydrate the food surface and brown it.  Microwaving: Microwave Radiation  Microwave ovens transfer heat via electromagnetic radiation, but with waves that  carry only a ten-thousandth the energy of infrared radiation from glowing coals.  This shift makes for a unique heating effect. Whereas infrared waves are energetic  enough to increase the vibratory movement of nearly all molecules, microwaves  tend to affect only polar molecules (p. 793), whose electrical imbalance gives the
radiation a kind of handle with which to move them. So foods that contain water  are heated directly and rapidly by microwaves. But the oven air, composed of  nonpolar nitrogen, oxygen, and hydrogen molecules, and nonpolar container  materials like glass, stoneware, and plastic (made of hydrocarbon chains), are  unaffected by the microwaves; the food heats them as it heats up.  Here’s how a microwave oven works. A transmitter, very much like a radio  transmitter, sets up an electromagnetic field in the oven which reverses its polarity  some 2 or 5 billion times every second. (It operates at a frequency of either 915 or  2,450 million cycles per second, compared to wall socket currents at 60 cycles, and  FM radio signals at some 100 million cycles per second.) Polar water molecules in  the food are pulled by the field to orient themselves with it, but because the field is  constantly changing, the molecules oscillate back and forth with it. The water  transmits this motion to neighboring molecules by knocking into them, and the  temperature of the food as a whole quickly rises.  Metal foil and utensils can be put in the microwave oven with moist foods without  causing problems, provided they’re reasonably large and kept some distance from  the walls and each other to prevent arcing. Fine metallic decoration on china will  spark and suffer damage. Foil is useful for partly shielding some foods from the  radiation, the thin edges of fish fillets, for example.  Microwave ovens are a recent invention. In 1945 Dr. Percy Spencer, a scientist  working for Raytheon in Waltham, Massachusetts, filed a patent for the use of  microwaves in cooking after he had successfully popped corn with them. This kind  of radiation had already been used in diathermy, or deep heat treatment for  patients with arthritis, as well as in communications and navigation. Microwave  ovens became a popular appliance in the 1970s.  Advantages and Disadvantages of Microwaves   Microwave radiation has one  great advantage over infrared: the fact that it cooks food much faster. Microwaves  can penetrate food to a depth of about an inch/2.5 cm, while infrared energy is  almost entirely absorbed at the surface. Because heat radiation can travel to the  center of foods only by the slow process of conduction, it’s easily beaten by  microwaves, with their substantially deeper reach. This reach, along with the  microwaves’ concentration on heating the food and not its surroundings, results in  a very efficient use of energy.  Microwave cooking has several disadvantages. One is that, in the case of meats,
speedy heating can cause greater fluid loss and so a drier texture, and makes it  more difficult to control doneness. This can be partly overcome by pulsing the  oven on and off to slow the heating. Another problem is that microwaves cannot  brown many foods unless they essentially dehydrate them, since the food surface  gets no warmer than the interior. Thin, radiation-concentrating metal sheets in  special microwavable food packaging can help heat the food surface to the point  that it browns.  Utensil Materials  Finally, a brief discussion of the materials from which we make our pots and pans.  We generally want two basic properties in a utensil. Its surface should be  chemically unreactive so that it won’t change the taste or edibility of food. And it  should conduct heat evenly and efficiently, so that local hot spots won’t develop  and burn the contents. No single material provides both properties.  The Different Behaviors of Metals and Ceramics  As we’ve seen, heat conduction in a solid proceeds either by the movement of  energetic   electrons,   or   by   vibration   in   crystal   structures.   A   material   whose  electrons are mobile enough to conduct heat well is also likely to give up those  electrons to other atoms at its surface: in other words, good conductors like metals  are usually chemically reactive. By the same token, inert compounds are poor  conductors. Ceramics are stable, unreactive mixtures of compounds (magnesium  and aluminum oxides, silicon dioxide) whose covalent bonds hold electrons  tightly. They therefore transmit heat slowly by means of inefficient vibrations. If  subjected to the direct and intense heat of the stovetop, ceramics can’t distribute  the energy evenly. Hot areas expand while cooler areas do not, mechanical stresses  build up, and the utensil cracks or shatters. This is why ceramics are generally used  only in the oven, where they encounter only moderate and diffuse heat, or are  applied in thin coatings on the surface of metals, so that the metals can do the job  of distributing the heat evenly.  Spontaneous Ceramic Coatings on Metals   It turns out that most of the metals  commonly used in kitchen utensils naturally cover themselves with a very thin  layer of ceramic material. Metallic electrons are mobile, and oxygen is electron-  hungry.   When   metal   is   exposed   to   the   air,   the   surface   atoms   undergo   a
spontaneous reaction with atmospheric oxygen to form a very stable metal oxide  compound. (The discoloration on silver and copper that we call   tarnish   is a metal-  sulfur compound; the sulfur comes mainly from air pollution.) These oxide films are  both unreactive and fairly tough. Aluminum oxide, when it occurs in crystals rather  than on pans, makes up the abrasive called corundum, and is also the principal  material of rubies and sapphires (the gem colors come from chromium and  titanium impurities). The problem is that these natural coatings are only a few  molecules thick, and are easily scratched through or worn away during cooking.  Metallurgists have found two ways to take advantage of metal oxidation at the pan  surface. The film over aluminum can be made up to a thousandth of an inch/0.03  mm thick, and so fairly impervious, by a chemical treatment. And iron can be  protected by mixing it with other metals that form a tougher oxide surface and so  produce stainless steel (p. 791).  Here are brief descriptions of the materials from which most kitchen utensils are  made today, and their particular advantages and disadvantages.  Ceramics  Earthenware, Stoneware, Glass   Ceramics are varying mixtures of a number of  different compounds, notably the oxides of silicon, aluminum, and magnesium.  Glass   is a particular variety of ceramic whose composition is more regular, and  usually includes a preponderance of silica (silicon dioxide). Until fairly recently,  these materials were made from naturally occurring mineral aggregates: the word  ceramic   comes from the Greek for “potter’s clay.” The molding and drying of simple  clay pottery, or   earthenware,   dates from about 9,000 years ago, or about the time  that plants and animals were first domesticated. Less porous and coarse than  earthenware, and much stronger, is   stoneware,   which contains enough silica and is  fired at a high enough temperature that it vitrifies, or becomes partly glass. The  Chinese invented this refinement sometime before 1500   BCE .   Porcelain   is a white  but translucent stoneware made by mixing kaolin, a very light clay, with a silicate  mineral, and firing at high kiln temperatures; it dates from the T’ang Dynasty (618–  907   CE ). This fine ceramic was introduced to Europe with the tea trade in the 17th  century, and in England was first called “Chinaware,” and then simply “China.” The  first glass containers were not molded or blown, but laboriously sculpted from  blocks, and date from 4,000 years ago in the Near East.
The Qualities of Ceramic Pots   The outstanding characteristic of ceramic materials  is chemical stability: they are unreactive, resist corrosion, and don’t affect the flavor  or other qualities of foods. (One exception to this rule is the fact that clays and  glazes sometimes contain lead, which is a nerve poison, and which can be leached  out into acidic foods. Imported ceramic containers made with high-lead clays or  glazes still occasionally cause cases of lead poisoning.) Ceramic pots tend to be  used only in slow, uniform cooking processes, especially oven baking and braising,  because   direct   high   heat   can   shatter   them.   Heat-resistant   forms   of   glass  incorporate an oxide of boron that has the effect of reducing thermal expansion by  a factor of about 3, and for this reason are less affected by thermal shock, though  they’re still not immune.  Enamelware   In utensils called   enamelware,   powdered glass is fused into a thin  layer onto the surface of iron or steel utensils. This was first done to cast iron early  in the 19th century, and today enameled metal is widely used in the dairy,  chemical, and brewing industries, as well as on bathtubs. In kitchen utensils, the  metal diffuses the direct heat evenly, the ceramic layer is thin enough that it can  expand and contract uniformly, and it protects the food from direct contact with  the metal. Enamelware is reasonably durable, though it still requires some care: the  ceramic layer can be chipped or damaged by quenching a hot pan in cold water.  The Advantages of Poor Conductivity   The poor conductivity of ceramic materials  is an advantage if the cook needs to keep food hot. Good conductors like copper  and aluminum quickly give up heat to their surroundings, while ceramics retain it  well. Similarly, ovens with ceramic (brick) walls are unparalleled for the evenness of  their heating. The walls slowly absorb and store large quantities of energy while  the oven is heated up, and then release it when the food is placed inside. Modern  metal ovens can’t store much heat and so must cycle their heating elements on  and off. This causes large temperature fluctuations, and can scorch breads and  other foods that are baked at high temperatures.  Nonstick Coatings and Silicone “Pans”  The materials for nonstick coatings were developed around the middle of the  20th century by industrial chemists, and nonstick utensils were introduced in
the 1960s. Teflon and its relatives are long chains of carbon atoms with  fluorine atoms projecting from the backbone. They produce a plastic-like  material with a smooth, slippery surface, and are as inert as ceramics at  moderate cooking temperatures. Above about 500ºF/250ºC, however, they  decompose into a number of noxious and toxic gases. Nonstick utensils  therefore need to be used with care to avoid overheating. The coatings have  the additional disadvantage of being easily scratched, and food sticks to the  scratches.  Beginning in the 1980s, flexible nonstick sheets and containers made of  silicone have been used by bakers to line metal baking sheets or replace  molded metal pans. Silicone is also a long-chain molecule, with a backbone of  alternating silicon and oxygen atoms, and small fat-like carbon chains  projecting from it. The backbone gives the material its flexibility, and the  hydrophobic projections make the surface behave like a permanently well-  oiled pan surface. Food-grade silicones decompose at temperatures above  about 480ºF/240ºC, so like nonstick pans, silicone bakeware must be used  with some caution.  Aluminum  Aluminum has been used in pots and pans for barely a century, despite the fact  that it’s the most abundant metal in the earth’s crust. It is never found in nature in  the pure state, and a good method for separating the metal from its ore wasn’t  developed until 1890. In cookware, it is usually alloyed with small amounts of  manganese and sometimes copper. Aluminum’s prime advantages are its relatively  low cost, a heat conductivity second only to copper’s, and a low density that makes  it lightweight and easily handled. Its ubiquitous presence in the form of foil  wrappings and beer and soft drink cans testifies to its usefulness. But because  unanodized aluminum develops only a thin oxide layer, reactive food molecules —  acids, alkalis, the hydrogen sulfide evolved by cooked eggs — will easily penetrate  to the metal surface, and a variety of aluminum oxide and hydroxide complexes,  some of them gray or black, are formed. These can mar light-colored foods. Today,  most aluminum utensils are either given a nonstick coating or are   anodized,   a
process that involves making the metal the positive pole (anode) in a solution of  sulfuric acid, and so forcing the oxidation of its surface to make a thick protective  oxide layer.  Copper  Copper is unique among the common metals because it can be found naturally in  the metallic state. For this reason it was the first metal to be used in tool making,  about 10,000 years ago. In the kitchen, it is prized for its unmatched conductivity,  which makes fast and even heating a simple matter. But copper is also relatively  expensive, since its conductivity has made it the preferred material for millions of  miles of electrical circuitry. It is troublesome to keep polished, because it has a high  affinity for oxygen   and   sulfur, and forms a greenish coating when exposed to air.  Most important, copper cookware can be harmful. Its oxide coating is sometimes  porous and powdery, and copper ions are easily leached into food solutions.  Copper ions can have useful effects: they stabilize foamed egg whites (p. 102), and  the green color of cooked vegetables is improved by their presence. But the  human body can excrete copper in only limited amounts, and excessive intake may  cause gastrointestinal problems and, in more extreme cases, liver damage. No one  will be poisoned by the occasional meringue whipped in a copper bowl, but bare  copper isn’t a good candidate for everyday cooking. To overcome this major  drawback,   manufacturers   line   copper   utensils   with   stainless   steel   or,   more  traditionally, with tin. Tin has its own limitations (p. 791).  Iron and Steel  Iron was a relatively late discovery because it exists in the earth’s crust primarily in  the form of oxides, and had to be encountered in its pure form by accident,  perhaps when a fire was built on an outcropping of ore. Iron artifacts have been  found that date from 3000   BCE , though the Iron Age, when the metal came into  regular   use   without   replacing   copper   and   bronze   (a   copper-tin   alloy)   in  preeminence, is said to begin around 1200   BCE .   Cast iron   is alloyed with about 3%  carbon to harden the metal, and also contains some silicon;   carbon steel   contains  less carbon, and is heat-treated to obtain a less brittle, tougher alloy that can be  formed into thinner pans. The chief attractions of cast iron and carbon steel in  kitchen work are their cheapness and safety. Excess iron is readily eliminated from
the body, and most people can actually benefit from additional dietary iron. Their  greatest disadvantage is a tendency to corrode, though this can be avoided by  regular seasoning (below) and gentle cleaning. Like aluminum, iron and carbon  steel can discolor foods. And iron turns out to be a poorer conductor of heat than  copper or aluminum. But exactly for this reason, and because it’s denser than  aluminum, a cast iron pan will absorb more heat and hold it longer than a similar  aluminum pan. Thick cast iron pans provide steady, even heat.  “Seasoning” Cast Iron and Carbon Steel   Cooks who appreciate cast iron and  carbon steel pans improve their easily corroded surface by building up an artificial  protective layer. They “season” them by coating them with cooking oil and heating  them for several hours. The oil penetrates into the pores and fissures of the metal,  sealing it from the attack of air and water. And the combination of heat, metal, and  air oxidizes the fatty acid chains and encourages them to bond to each other  (“polymerize”) to form a dense, hard, dry layer (just as linseed and other “drying  oils” doon wood and on paintings). Highly unsaturated oils — soy oil, corn oil —  are especially prone to oxidation and polymerizing. To avoid removing the  protective oil layer, cooks carefully clean seasoned cast iron pans with mild soaps  and a dissolving abrasive like salt, rather then with detergents and scouring pads.  Stainless Steel  The important exception to the rule that metals form protective surface coatings is  iron, which rusts in the presence of air and moisture. The orange complex of ferric  oxide and water (Fe 2 O 3 • H 2 O) is a loose powder rather than a continuous film, and  so does not protect the metal surface from further contact with the air. Unless it’s  protected by some other means, iron metal will corrode continuously (this is why  pure iron is not found in nature). Efforts to make this cheap and abundant element  more resistant to rusting resulted in the 19th century in the development of  stainless steel,   an iron-carbon alloy that — in cookware — is formulated with about  18% chromium and 8–10% nickel. Chrome is synonymous with bright and  permanent shininess because chromium is extremely prone to oxidation and  naturally forms a thick protective oxide coat. In the stainless steel mixture, oxygen  reacts preferentially with the chromium atoms at the surface, and the iron never  gets the opportunity to rust.  This chemical stability is bought at a price. Stainless steel is more expensive than
cast iron and carbon steel, and it’s an even poorer heat conductor. The addition of  large numbers of foreign atoms apparently interferes with electron movement by  causing structural and electrical irregularities in the metal. The transfer of heat in a  stainless pan can be evened out by coating the underside of the pan with copper,  or by inserting a copper or aluminum plate in the pan bottom, or by making the  pan out of two or more layers, with a good conductor just under the surface. Of  course these refinements add further to the cost of the utensil. Still, these hybrids  are the closest thing we have to the ideal chemically inert but thermally responsive  pan.  Tin  Tin was probably first used in combination with copper to make the mechanically  tougher alloy called bronze. Today tin is generally found only as a nontoxic,  unreactive   lining   in   copper   utensils. This   limited   role   is   the   result   of   two  inconvenient properties: a low melting point, 450ºF/230ºC, that can be reached in  some cooking procedures, and a softness that makes the metal very susceptible to  wear. The tin alloy called   pewter,   which used to contain some lead and now is  made with 7% antimony and 2% copper, is not much used today.  Object 14
The Four Basic Food Molecules  This chapter describes the characters of the four chemical protagonists in foods  and the cooking process, the molecules referred to constantly in the first fourteen  chapters.  •   Water   is the major component of nearly all foods — and of ourselves! It’s also  a medium in which we heat foods in order to change their flavor, texture,  and stability. One particular property of water solutions, their acidity or  alkalinity, is a source of flavor, and has an important influence on the  behavior of the other food molecules.  •   Fats, oils,   and their chemical relatives are water’s antagonists. Like water,  they’re a component of living things and of foods, and they’re also a cooking  medium. But their chemical nature is very different — so different that they  can’t mix with water. Living things put this incompatibility to work by using  fatty materials to contain the watery contents of cells. Cooks put this quality  to work when they fry foods to crisp and brown them, and when they  thicken sauces with microscopic but intact fat droplets. Fats also carry  aromas, and produce them.  •   Carbohydrates,   the specialty of plants, include sugars, starch, cellulose, and  pectic substances. They generally mix freely with water. Sugars give many of  our foods flavor, while starch and the cell-wall carbohydrates provide bulk  and texture.  •   Proteins   are the sensitive food molecules, and are especially characteristic of  foods from animals: milk and eggs, meat and fish. Their shapes and behavior  are drastically changed by heat, acid, salt, and even air. Cheeses, custards,  cured and cooked meats, and raised breads all owe their textures to altered  proteins.  Water  Water is our most familiar chemical companion. It’s the smallest and simplest of  the basic food molecules, just three atoms: H 2 O, two hydrogens and an oxygen.
And its significance is hard to overstate. Leaving aside the fact that it shapes the  earth’s continents and climate, all life, including our own, exists in a water solution:  a legacy of life’s origin billions of years ago in the oceans. Our bodies are 60% water  by weight; raw meat is about 75% water, and fruits and vegetables up to 95%.  Water molecules. Here are three different ways of representing a molecule of water,  which is formed from one oxygen and two hydrogen atoms. Because the oxygen atom  exerts a stronger pull on the electrons (small dots) it shares with the hydrogen atoms,  the water molecule is electrically unsymmetrical. The separation of positive and  negative centers of charge leads to the formation of weak bonds between oppositely  charged centers on different molecules. These weak bonds between molecules, shown  here by dashed lines, are called hydrogen bonds.  Water Clings Strongly to Itself  The important properties of ordinary water can be understood as different  manifestations of one fact. Each water molecule is electrically unsymmetrical, or  polar : it has a positive end and a negative end. This is because the oxygen atom  exerts a stronger pull than the hydrogen atoms on the electrons they share, and  because the hydrogen atoms project from one side of the oxygen to form a kind of  V shape: so there’s an oxygen end and a hydrogen end to the water molecule, and  the oxygen end is more negative than the hydrogen end. This polarity means that  the negative oxygen on one water molecule feels an electrical attraction to the  positive hydrogens on other water molecules. When this attraction brings the two  molecules closer to each other and holds them there, it’s called a   hydrogen bond.  The molecules in ice and liquid water are participating in from one to four  hydrogen bonds at any given moment. However, the motion of the molecules in
the liquid is forceful enough to overcome the strength of hydrogen bonds and  break them: so the hydrogen bonds in liquid water are fleeting, and are constantly  being formed and broken.  This natural tendency of water molecules to form bonds with each other has a  number of effects in life and in the kitchen.  Water Is Good at Dissolving other Substances  Water forms hydrogen bonds not only with itself, but with other substances that  have at least some electrical polarity, some unevenness in the distribution of  positive and negative electrical charges. Of the other major food molecules, which  are much larger and more complex than water, both carbohydrates and proteins  have polar regions. Water molecules are attracted to these regions and cluster  around them. When they do this, they effectively surround the larger molecules  and separate them from each other. If they do this more or less completely, so that  each molecule is mostly surrounded by a cloud of water molecules, then that  substance has   dissolved   in the water.  Hard Water: Dissolved Minerals  Water is so good at dissolving other substances that apart from distilled water, it’s  seldom found in anything like pure form. Tap water is quite variable in composition,  depending on its ultimate source (well, lake, river) and its municipal treatment  (chlorination, fluoridation, and so on). Two common minerals in tap water are  carbonate (CO3) and sulfate (SO4) salts of calcium and magnesium. Calcium and  magnesium ions are troublesome because they react with soaps to form insoluble  scums, and because they leave crusty precipitates on showerheads and teapots.  Such so-called hard water can also affect the color and texture of vegetables, and  the consistency of bread dough (pp. 282, 535). Hard water can be softened either  city-wide or in the home, usually by one of two methods: precipitating the calcium  and magnesium by adding lime, or using an ion-exchange mechanism to replace  the calcium and magnesium with sodium. Distilled water, which is produced by  boiling ordinary water and collecting the condensed steam, is fairly free of  impurities.
Water and Heat: From Ice to Steam  The hydrogen bonds among its molecules have a strong effect on how water  absorbs and transmits heat. At low temperatures, water exists as solid ice, its  molecules immobilized in organized crystals. As it warms up, it first melts to  become liquid water; and then the liquid water is vaporized to form steam. Each  phase is affected by hydrogen bonding.  Ice Damages Cells   Normally, the solid phase of a given substance is denser than  the liquid phase. As the molecules’ attraction for each other becomes stronger  than   their   movements,   the   molecules   settle   into   a   compact   arrangement  determined by their geometry. In solid water, however, the molecular packing is  dictated by the requirement for even distribution of hydrogen bonds. The result is  a solid with   more   space between molecules than the liquid phase has, by a factor  of about one-eleventh. It’s because water expands when it freezes that water pipes  burst when the heat fails in winter; that bottles of beer put in the freezer for a  quick chill and then forgotten will pop open; that containers of leftover soup or  sauce will shatter in the freezer if they’re too full for the liquid to expand freely.  And it’s why raw plant and animal tissues are damaged when they’re frozen and  leak liquid when thawed. During freezing, the expanding ice crystals rupture cell  membranes and walls, which then lose internal fluids when the crystals melt.  Liquid Water Is Slow to Heat Up   Again thanks to the hydrogen bonding between  water molecules, liquid water has a high   specific heat,   the amount of energy  required to raise its temperature by a given amount. That is, water absorbs a lot of  energy before its temperature rises. For example, it takes 10 times the energy to  heat an ounce of water 1º as it does to heat an ounce of iron 1º. In the time that it  takes to get an iron pan too hot to handle on the stove, water will have gotten only  tepid. Before the heat energy added to the water can cause its molecules to move  faster and its temperature to rise, some of the energy must first break the  hydrogen bonds so that the molecules are   free   to move faster.  The basic consequence of this characteristic is that a body of water — our body, or  a pot of water, or an ocean — can absorb a lot of heat without itself quickly  becoming hot. In the kitchen, it means that a covered pan of water will take more  than twice as long as a pan of oil to heat up to a given temperature; and  conversely, it will hold that temperature longer after the heat is removed.  Liquid Water Absorbs a Lot of Heat as It Vaporizes into Steam   Hydrogen
bonding also gives water an unusually high “latent heat of vaporization,” or the  amount of energy that water absorbs without a rise in temperature as it changes  from a liquid to a gas. This is how sweating cools us: as the water on the skin of our  over-heated body evaporates, it absorbs large amounts of energy and carries it  away into the air. Ancient cultures used the same principle to cool their drinking  water and wine, storing them in porous clay vessels that evaporate moisture  continuously. Cooks take advantage of it when they bake delicate preparations like  custards gently by partly immersing the containers in an open water bath, or oven-  roast meats slowly at low temperatures, or simmer stock in an open pot. In each  case, evaporation removes energy from the food or its surroundings and causes it  to cook more gently.  Steam Releases a Lot of Heat When It Condenses into Water   Conversely, when  water vapor hits a cool surface and condenses into liquid water, it gives up that  same high heat of vaporization. This is why steam is such an effective and quick  way of cooking foods compared with plain air — also a gas — at the same  temperature. We can put a hand into an oven at 212ºF/100ºC and hold it there for  some time before it gets uncomfortably warm; but a steaming pot will scald us in a  second or two. In bread baking, an initial blast of steam increases the dough’s  expansion, or oven spring, and produces a lighter loaf.  Water and Acidity: The pH Scale  Acids and Bases   Despite the fact that the molecular formula for water is H 2 O, even  absolutely pure water contains other combinations of oxygen and hydrogen.  Chemical bonds are continually being formed and broken in matter, and water is  no   exception.   It   tends   to “dissociate” to   a   slight   extent,   with   a   hydrogen  occasionally breaking off from one molecule and rebonding to a nearby intact  water molecule. This leaves one negatively charged OH combination, and a  positively   charged   H 3 O.   Under   normal   conditions,   a   very   small   number   of  molecules exist in the dissociated state, something on the order of two ten-  millionths of a percent. This is a small number but a significant one, because the  presence of relatively mobile hydrogen ions, which are the basic units of positive  charge (protons), can have drastic effects on other molecules in solution. A  structure that is stable with a few protons around may be unstable when many  protons are in the vicinity. So significant is the proton concentration that humans
have a specialized taste sensation to estimate it: sourness. Our term for the class of  chemicalcompounds that release protons into solutions,   acids,   derives from the  Latin   acere,   meaning to taste sour. We call the complementary chemical group that  accepts protons and neutralizes them,   bases   or   alkalis.  The properties of acids and bases affect us continually in our daily life. Practically  every food we eat, from steak to coffee to oranges, is at least slightly acidic. And  the degree of acidity of the cooking medium can have great influence on such  characteristics as the color of fruits and vegetables and the texture of meat and  egg proteins. Some measure of acidity would clearly be quite useful. A simple scale  has been devised to provide just that.  The pH Scale   The standard measure of proton activity in solutions is   pH,   a term  suggested by the Danish chemist S. P. L. Sørenson in 1909. It’s essentially a more  convenient version of the minuscule percentages of molecules involved (for some  details, see box below). The pH scale runs from 0 to 14. The pH of neutral, pure  water, with equal numbers of protons and OH ions, is set at 7. A pH lower than 7  indicates a greater concentration of protons and so an acidic solution, while a pH  above 7 indicates a greater prevalence of proton- accepting   groups, and so a basic  solution. Here’s a list of common solutions and their usual pH.  Liquid   pH  Human gastric  juice  1.3–  3.0  Lemon juice   2.1  Orange juice   3.0  Yogurt   4.5  Black coffee   5.0  Milk   6.9  Egg white   7.6–  9.5  Baking soda in  water   8.4  Household  ammonia   11.9
Acids. Acids are molecules that release reactive hydrogen ions, or protons, in water,  where neutral water molecules pick them up and become positively charged. The  acids themselves become negatively charged. Left: Water itself is a weak acid. Right:  Acetic acid.  The Definition of pH  The pH of a solution is defined as “the negative logarithm of the hydrogen ion  concentration expressed in moles per liter.”   The logarithm of a number is the  exponent, or power, to which 10 must be raised in order to obtain the  number. For example, the hydrogen ion concentration in pure water is 10 -7  moles per liter, so the pH of pure water is 7. Larger concentrations are  described by smaller negative exponents, so a more acidic solution will have a  pH lower than 7, and a less acidic, more basic solution will have a pH higher  than 7. Each increment of 1 in pH signifies an increase or decrease in proton  concentration by a factor of 10; so there are 1,000 times the number of  hydrogen ions in a solution of pH 5 as there are in a solution of pH 8.  Fats, Oils, and Relatives: Lipids  Lipids Don’t Mix with Water  Fats and oils are members of a large chemical family called the   lipids,   a term that  comes from the Greek for “fat.” Fats and oils are invaluable in the kitchen: they
provide flavor and a pleasurable and persistent smoothness; they tenderize many  foods by permeating and weakening their structure; they’re a cooking medium  that allows us to heat foods well above the boiling point of water, thus drying out  the food surface to produce a crisp texture and rich flavor. Many of these qualities  reflect a basic property of the lipids: they are chemically unlike water, and largely  incompatible with it. And thanks to this quality, they have played an essential role  in the function of all living cells from the very beginnings of life. Because they don’t  mix with water, lipids are well suited to the job of forming boundaries —  membranes — between watery cells. This function is performed mainly by  phospholipids similar to lecithin (p. 802), molecules that cooks also use to form  membranes around tiny oil droplets. Fats and oils themselves are created and  stored by animals and plants as a concentrated, compact form of chemical energy,  packing twice the calories as the same weight of either sugar or starch.  In addition to fats, oils, and phospholipids, the lipid family includes betacarotene  and similar plant pigments, vitamin E, cholesterol, and waxes. These are all  molecules made by living things that consist mainly of chains of carbon atoms,  with hydrogen atoms projecting from the chain. Each carbon atom can form four  bonds with other atoms, so a given carbon atom in the chain is usually bonded to  two carbon atoms, one on each side, and two hydrogens.  This carbon-chain structure has one overriding consequence: lipids can’t dissolve  in water. They are “hydrophobic” or “water-fearing” substances. The reason for this  is that carbon and hydrogen atoms pull with a similar force on their shared  electrons. So unlike the oxygen-hydrogen bond, the carbon-hydrogen bond is not  polar, and the hydrocarbon chain as a whole is nonpolar. When polar water and  nonpolar lipids are mixed together, the polar water molecules form hydrogen  bonds with each other, the long lipid chains form a weaker kind of bond with each  other (van der Waals bonds, p. 814), and the two substances segregate themselves.  Oils minimize the surface at which they contact water by coalescing into large  blobs, and resist being divided into smaller droplets.  Thanks to their chemical relatedness, different lipids can dissolve in each other.  This is why the carotenoid pigments — the betacarotene in carrots, the lycopene  in tomatoes — and intact chlorophyll, whose molecule has a lipid tail, color  cooking fats much more intensely than they do cooking water.  Lipids share two other characteristics. One is their clingy, viscous, oily consistency,  which results from the many weak bonds formed between their long carbon-
hydrogen molecules. And those same molecules are so bulky that all natural fats,  solid or liquid, float on water. Water is a denser substance due to its extensive  hydrogen bonding, which packs its small molecules more tightly together.  The Structure of Fats  Fats and oils are members of the same class of chemical compounds, the  triglycerides.   They differ from each other only in their melting points: oils are liquid  at room temperature, fats solid. Rather than use the technical   triglyceride   to denote  these compounds, I’ll use   fats   as the generic term. Oils are liquid fats. These are  invaluable ingredients in cooking. Their clingy viscosity provides a moist, rich  quality to many foods, and their high boiling point makes them an ideal cooking  medium for the production of intense browning-reaction flavors (p. 778).  Glycerol and Fatty Acids   Though they contain traces of other lipids, natural fats  and oils are triglycerides, a combination of three   fatty acid   molecules with one  molecule of   glycerol.   Glycerol is a short 3-carbon chain that acts as a common  frame to which three fatty acids can attach themselves. The fatty acids are so  named because they consist of a long hydrocarbon chain with one end that has an  oxygen-hydrogen group and that can release the hydrogen as a proton. It’s the  acidic group of the fatty acid that binds to the glycerol frame to construct a  glyceride: glycerol plus one fatty acid makes a monoglyceride, glycerol plus two  fatty acids makes a diglyceride, and glycerol plus three fatty acids makes a  triglyceride. Before it bonds to the glycerol frame, the acidic end of the fatty acid is  polar, like water, and so it gives the free fatty acid a partial ability to form hydrogen  bonds with water.  Fatty acid chains can be from 4 to about 35 carbons long, though the most  common in foods are from 14 to 20. The properties of a given triglyceride molecule  depend on the structure of its three fatty acids and their relative positions on the  glycerol frame. And the properties of a fat depend on the particular mixture of  triglycerides it contains.
Fats and fatty acids. Fatty acids are mainly chains of carbon atoms, shown here as black  dots. (Each carbon atom has two hydrogen atoms projecting from it; the hydrogen  atoms are not shown.) A fat molecule is a triglyceride, which is formed from one  molecule of glycerol and three fatty acids. The acidic heads of the fatty acids are  capped and neutralized by the glycerol, so the triglyceride as a whole no longer has a  polar, water-compatible end. The fatty-acid chains can rotate around the glycerol head  to form chair-like arrangements (bottom).  Saturated And Unsaturated Fats, Hydrogenation,  and Trans Fatty Acids  The Meaning of Saturation   The terms “saturated” and “unsaturated” fats are  familiar from nutrition labels and ongoing discussions of diet and health, but their  meaning is seldom explained. A   saturated   lipid is one whose carbon chain is  saturated — filled to capacity — with hydrogen atoms: there are no double bonds  between carbon atoms, so each carbon within the chain is bonded to two  hydrogen atoms. An   unsaturated   lipid has one or more double bonds between  carbon atoms along its backbone. The double-bonded carbons therefore have  only one bond left for a hydrogen atom. A fat molecule with more than one double  bond is called   polyunsaturated.
Saturated and unsaturated fatty acids. An unsaturated fatty acid has one or more  double bonds along its carbon chain, and a rigid kink at that point in the chain. The  structural irregularity caused by the double bond makes it more difficult for these  molecules to solidify into compact crystals, so at a given temperature, unsaturated fats  are softer than saturated fats. In the hydrogenation of vegetable oils to make them  harder, some cis-unsaturated fatty acids are converted to trans-unsaturated fatty acids,  which are less kinked and behave more like a saturated fatty acid, both in cooking and  in the body.  Fat Saturation and Consistency   Saturation matters in the behavior of fats  because double bonds significantly alter the geometry and the regularity of the  fatty-acid chain, and so its chemical and physical properties. A saturated fatty acid  is very regular and can stretch out completely straight. But because a double bond  between carbon atoms distorts the usual bonding angles, it has the effect of  adding a kink to the chain. Two or more kinks can make it curl.  A group of identical and regular molecules fits more neatly and closely together  than different and irregular molecules. Fats composed of straight-chain saturated  fatty acids fall into an ordered solid structure — the process has been described as  “zippering” — more readily than do kinked unsaturated fats. Animal fats are about  half   saturated   and   half   unsaturated,   and   solid   at   room   temperature,   while  vegetable fats are about 85% unsaturated, and are liquid oils in the kitchen. Even  among the animal fats, beef and lamb fats are noticeably harder than pork or  poultry fats, because more of their triglycerides are saturated.
Double bonds are not the only factor in determining the melting point of fats.  Short-chain fatty acids are not as readily “zippered” together as the longer chains,  and so tend to lower the melting point of fats. And the more variety in the  structures of their fatty acids, the more likely the mixture of triglycerides will be an  oil.  Fat Saturation and Rancidity   Saturated fats are also more stable, slower to  become rancid than unsaturated fats. The double bond of an unsaturated fat  opens a space unprotected by hydrogen atoms on one side of the chain. This  exposes the carbon atoms to reactive molecules that can break the chain and  produce small volatile fragments. Atmospheric oxygen is just such a reactive  molecule, and is one of the major causes of flavor deterioration in foods containing  fats. Water and metal atoms from other food ingredients also help fragmentfats  and cause rancidity. The more unsaturated the fat, the more prone it is to  deterioration. Beef has a longer shelf life than chicken, pork, or lamb because its fat  is more saturated and so more stable.  Some small volatile fragments of unsaturated lipids actually have desirable and  distinctive aromas. The typical aroma of crushed green leaves and of cucumber  both come from fragments of membrane phospholipids generated not just by  oxygen, but by special plant enzymes. And the characteristic aroma of deep-fried  foods   comes   in   part   from   particular   fatty-acid   fragments   created   at   high  temperatures.  Saturated and Unsaturated Fatty Acids in Foods and Cooking Fats  Proportions of fatty acids are given as a percentage of the total fatty-acid  content.  Fat or Oil  Saturated  Fatty Acids  Monounsaturated  Fatty Acids  Polyunsaturated  Fatty Acids  Butter   62   29   4  Beef   50   42   4  Lamb   47   42   4  Pork   40   45   11
Fat or Oil  Saturated  Fatty Acids  Monounsaturated  Fatty Acids  Polyunsaturated  Fatty Acids  Chicken   30   45   21  Coconut oil   86   6   2  Palm kernel  oil  81   11   2  Palm oil   49   37   9  Cocoa butter   60   35   2  Vegetable  shortening  31   51   14  Cottonseed  oil  26   18   50  Stick  margarine  19   59   18  Tub  margarine  17   47   31  Peanut oil   17   46   32  Soybean oil   14   23   58  Olive oil   13   74   8  Corn oil   13   24   59  Sunflower  seed oil  13   24   59  Grapeseed oil   11   16   68  Canola oil   7   55   33  Safflower oil   9   12   75  Walnut oil   9   16   70
Omega-3 fatty acids. Omega-3 fatty acids are unsaturated fatty acids whose first  double bond begins at the third carbon atom from the end. (The most common  unsaturated fatty acids are omega-6 fatty acids.) They are essential in our diet for,  among other things, the proper function of the immune and cardiovascular systems.  Linolenic acid has 3 double bonds among its 18 carbon atoms, and is found in green  leaves and in some seed oils. Eicosapentaenoic acid has 20 carbons and 5 double  bonds, and is found almost exclusively in seafood (p. 183).  Hydrogenation:   Altering   Fat   Saturation   For   more   than   a   century   now,  manufacturers have been making solid, fat-like shortenings and margarines from  liquid seed oils to obtain both the desired texture and improved keeping qualities.  There are several ways to do this, the simplest and most common being to saturate  the unsaturated fatty acids artificially. This process is called   hydrogenation,   because  it adds hydrogen atoms to the unsaturated chains. A small amount of nickel is  added to the oil as a catalyst, and the mixture is then exposed to hydrogen gas at  high temperature and pressure. After the fat has absorbed the desired amount of  hydrogen, the nickel is filtered out.  Trans Fatty Acids   It turns out that the hydrogenation process straightens a certain  proportion of the kinks in unsaturated fatty acids not by adding hydrogen atoms  to them, but by rearranging the double bond, twisting it so that its bend is less  extreme. These molecules remain chemically unsaturated — the double bond  between two carbons remains — but they have been transformed from an acutely  irregular   cis   geometry to a more regular   trans   structure (see illustration, p. 799).   Cis  is Latin for “on this side of,” and   trans   for “across from”; the terms describe the  positions of neighboring hydrogen atoms on the double bond between carbon  atoms. Because the trans fatty acids are less kinked, more like a saturated fat chain  in structure, they make it easier for the fat to crystallize and so make it firmer. They  also make the fatty acid less prone to attack by oxygen, so it’s more stable.
Unfortunately, trans fatty acids also resemble saturated fats in raising blood  cholesterol levels, which can contribute to the development of heart disease (p.  38). Manufacturers will soon be required to list the trans fatty acid content of their  foods, and they’re beginning to implement other processing techniques that  harden fat consistency without creating trans fatty acids.  Fats and Heat  Most fats do not have sharply defined melting points. Instead, they soften  gradually over a broad temperature range. As the temperature rises, the different  kinds of fat molecules melt at different points and slowly weaken the whole  structure. (An interesting exception to this rule is cocoa butter, p. 705). This  behavior is especially important in making pastries and cakes, and it’s what makes  butter spreadable at room temperature. butter, p. 705). This behavior is especially  important in making pastries and cakes, and it’s what makes butter spreadable at  room temperature.  Melted fats do eventually change from a liquid to a gas: but only at very high  temperatures, from 500º to 750ºF/260– 400ºC. This high boiling point, far above  water’s, is the indirect result of the fats’ large molecular size. While they can’t form  hydrogen bonds, the carbon chains of fats do form weaker bonds with each  other(p. 814). Because fat molecules are capable of forming so many bonds along  their lengthy hydrocarbon chains, the individually weak interactions have a large  net effect: it takes a lot of heat energy to knock the molecules apart from each  other.  The Smoke Point   Most fats begin to decompose at temperatures well below their  boiling points, and may even spontaneously ignite on the stovetop if their fumes  come into contact with the gas flame. These facts limit the maximum useful  temperature of cooking fats. The characteristic temperature at which a fat breaks  down into visible gaseous products is called the   smoke point.   Not only are the  smoky fumes obnoxious, but the other materials that remain in the liquid,  including chemically active free fatty acids, tend to ruin the flavor of the food  being cooked.  The smoke point depends on the initial free fatty acid content of the fat: the lower  the free fatty acid content, the more stable the fat, and the higher the smoke point.  Free fatty acid levels are generally lower in vegetable oils than in animal fats, lower
in refined oils than unrefined ones, and lower in fresh fats and oils than in old ones.  Fresh refined vegetable oils begin to smoke around 450ºF/230ºC, animal fats  around 375ºF/190ºC. Fats that contain other substances, such as emulsifiers,  preservatives, and in the case of butter, proteins and carbohydrates, will smoke at  lower temperatures than pure fats. Fat breakdown during deep frying can be  slowed by using a tall, narrow pan and so reducing the area of contact between fat  and atmosphere. The smoke point of a deep-frying fat is lowered every time it’s  used, since some breakdown is inevitable even at moderate temperatures, and  trouble-making particles of food are always left behind.  Emulsifiers: Phospholipids, Lecithin, Monoglycerides  Some very useful chemical relatives of the true fats, the triglycerides, are the  diglycerides and monoglycerides. These molecules act as   emulsifiers   to make fine,  cream-like   mixtures   of   fat   and   water   —   such   sauces   as   mayonnaise   and  hollandaise — even though fat and water don’t normally mix with each other. The  most prominent natural emulsifiers are the diglyceride   phospholipids   in egg yolks,  the most abundant of which is   lecithin   (it makes up about a third of the yolk lipids).  Diglycerides have only two fatty-acid chains attached to the glycerol frame, and  monoglycerides just one, with the remaining positions on the frame being  occupied by small polar groups of atoms. These molecules are thus water-soluble  at the head, and fat-soluble at the tail. In cell membranes, the phospholipids  assemble themselves in two layers, with one set of polar heads facing the watery  interior, the other set the watery exterior, and the tails of both sets mingling in  between. When the cook whisks some fat into a water-based liquid that contains  emulsifiers — oil into egg yolks, for example — the fat forms tiny droplets that  would normally coalesce and separate again. But the emulsifier tails become  dissolved in the droplets, and the electrically charged heads project from the  droplets and shield the droplets from each other. The emulsion of fat droplets is  now stable.  These “surface-active” molecules   have   many   other   applications   as   well.   For  example, monoglycerides have been used for decades in the baking business  because they help retard staling, apparently by complexing with amylose and  blocking starch retrogradation.
Phospholipid emulsifiers. Phospholipids are diglycerides, and are excellent emulsifiers,  molecules that make possible a stable mixture of oil and water. Unlike the triglycerides  of fat and oil, they have a polar, water-compatible head. Such emulsifiers bury their  fatty-acid tails in oil droplets, while their water-compatible, electrically charged heads  project from the surface and block the droplets from contacting each other and  coalescing.  Carbohydrates  The name for this large group of molecules comes from the early idea that they  were made up of carbon and water. They are indeed made up of carbon, hydrogen,  and oxygen atoms, though the oxygen and hydrogen are not found as intact water  complexes within the molecules. Carbohydrates are produced by all plants and  animals for the purpose of storing chemical energy, and by plants to make a  supporting skeleton for its cells. Simple sugars and starch are energy stores, while  pectins, cellulose, and other cell-wall carbohydrates are the plant’s structural  materials.  Sugars  Sugars are the simplest carbohydrates. There are many different kinds of sugar  molecules, each distinguished by the number of carbon atoms it contains, and
then by the particular arrangement it assumes. Five-carbon sugars are especially  important to all life because two of them, ribose and deoxyribose, form the  backbones of ribonucleic acid (RNA) and deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA), the carriers  of the genetic code. And the 6-carbon sugar glucose is the molecule from which  most living things obtain the energy to run the biochemical machinery of their  cells. Sugars are such an important nutrient that we have a special sense designed  specifically to detect them. Sugars taste sweet, and sweetness is a nearly universal  source of pleasure. It’s the essence of the dishes we serve at the end of the meal, as  well as of candies and confections. Sugars and their properties are described in  detail in chapter 12.  Oligosaccharides  The oligosaccharides (“several-unit sugars”) raffinose, stachyose, and verbascose  are 3-, 4-, and 5-ring sugars, respectively, all too large to trigger our sweet  detectors, so they’re tasteless. They’re commonly found in the seeds and other  organs of plants, where they make up part of the energy supply. These sugars all  affect our digestive system, thanks to the fact that we don’t have digestive  enzymes capable of breaking them down into single sugars that can be absorbed  by the intestine. As a result, the oligosaccharides are not digested and pass intact  into the colon, where various bacteria do digest them, producing large quantities  of carbon dioxide and other gases in the process (p. 486).  Polysaccharides: Starch, Pectins, Gums  Polysaccharides,   which   include   starch   and   cellulose,   are   sugar   polymers,   or  molecules composed of numerous individual sugar units, as many as several  thousand. Usually only one or a very few kinds of sugars are found in a given  polysaccharide.   Polysaccharides   are   classified   according   to   the   overall  characteristics   of   the   large   molecules:   a   general   size   range,   an   average  composition, and a common set of properties. Like the sugars of which they’re  composed, polysaccharides contain many exposed oxygen and hydrogen atoms,  so they can form hydrogen bonds and absorb water. However, they may or may  not dissolve in water, depending on the attractive forces among the polymers  themselves.
A sugar, glucose, and a polysaccharide, starch, which is a chain of glucose molecules.  Plants produce two broadly different forms of starch: simple long chains called  amylose, and highly branched chains called amylopectin.  Starch   By far the most important polysaccharide for the cook is   starch,   the  compact, unreactive polymer in which plants store their supply of sugar. Starch is  simply   a   chain   of   glucose   sugars.   Plants   produce   starch   in   two   different  configurations: a completely linear chain called   amylose,   and a highly branched  form called   amylopectin,   each of which may contain thousands of glucose units.  Starch molecules are deposited together in a series of concentric layers to form  solid microscopic granules. When starchy plant tissue is cooked in water, the  granules absorb water, swell, and release starch molecules; when cooled again, the  starch molecules rebond to each other and can form a moist but solid gel. Various  aspects of starch — the way it determines the texture of cooked rice, its formation  into pure starch noodles, its role in breads, pastries, and sauces — are described in  detail in chapters 9–11.  Glycogen   Glycogen, or “animal starch,” is an animal carbohydrate similar to  amylopectin, though more highly branched. It’s a fairly minor component of  animal tissue and so of meats, although its concentration at the time of slaughter  will affect the ultimate pH of the meat, and thereby its texture (p. 142).  Cellulose   Cellulose is, like amylose, a linear plant polysaccharide made up solely of
glucose sugars. Yet thanks to a minor difference in the way the sugars are linked to  each other, the two compounds have very different properties: cooking dissolves  starch granules but leaves cellulose fibers intact; most animals can digest starch,  but not cellulose. Cellulose is a structural support that’s laid down in cell walls in  the form of tiny fibers analogous to steel reinforcing bars, and it’s made to be  durable. Few animals can digest cellulose, and hay-eating cattle and wood-eating  termites can do so only because their guts are populated by cellulose-digesting  bacteria. To other animals, including ourselves, cellulose is indigestible fiber (which  has its own value; see p. 258).  Hemicelluloses and Pectic Substances   These polysaccharides (made from a  variety of sugars, including galactose, xylose, arabinose) are found together with  cellulose in the plant cell walls. If the cellulose fibrils are the reinforcing bars in the  cell walls, the amorphous hemicelluloses and pectic substances are a sort of jelly-  like cement in which the bars are embedded. Their significance for the cook is that,  unlike cellulose, they are partly soluble in water, and therefore contribute to the  softening of cooked vegetables and fruits. Pectin is abundant enough to be  extracted from citrus fruits and apples and used to thicken fruit syrups into jams  and jellies. These carbohydrates are described in detail in chapter 5.  Inulin   Inulin is a polymer of fructose sugars, from a handful to hundreds per  molecule. Inulin is a form of energy storage and a source of antifreeze (sugars  lower the freezing point of a water solution) in members of the onion and lettuce  families, notably garlic and the sunchoke. Like the oligosaccharides, inulin is not  digestible, and so feeds bacteria in our large intestine and generates gas.  Plant Gums   There are a number of other plant carbohydrates that cooks and  manufacturers have found useful for thickening and gelling liquid foods, helping  to stabilize emulsions, and producing smoother consistencies in frozen goods and  candies. Like the cell-wall cements, they’re generally complex polymers of several  different sugars or related carbohydrates. They include:  •   Agarose,   alginates,   and   carrageenans,   cell-wall   polymers   from   various  seaweeds  •   Gum arabic, which exudes from cuts in various species of   Acacia   trees  •   Gum tragacanth, an exudate from various species of   Astralagus   shrubs  •   Guar   gum,   from   seeds   of   a   shrub   in   the   bean   family   ( Cyamopsis  tetragonobola )
•   Locust-bean gum, from seeds of the carob tree,   Ceratonia siliqua  •   Xanthan gum and gellan, polysaccharides produced by certain bacteria in  industrial fermentation  Proteins  Of all the major food molecules, proteins are the most challenging and mercurial.  The others, water and fats and carbohydrates, are pretty stable and staid. But  expose proteins to a little heat, or acid, or salt, or air, and their behavior changes  drastically. This changeability reflects their biological mission. Carbohydrates and  fats are mainly passive forms of stored energy, or structural materials. But proteins  are the active machinery of life. They assemble all the molecules that make a cell,  themselves included, and tear them down as well; they move molecules from one  place in the cell to another; in the form of muscle fibers, they move whole animals.  They’re at the heart of all organic activity, growth, and movement. So it’s the  nature of proteins to be active and sensitive. When we cook foods that contain  them, we take advantage of their dynamic nature to make new structures and  consistencies.  Amino Acids and Peptides  Like starch and cellulose, proteins are large polymers of smaller molecular units.  The smaller units are called   amino acids.   They consist of between 10 and 40 atoms,  mainly carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen, with at least one nitrogen atom in an   amine  group — NH >2 — that gives the amino acids their family name. A couple of amino  acids include sulfur atoms. There are about 20 different kinds of amino acids that  occur in significant quantities in food. Particular protein molecules are dozens to  hundreds of amino acids long, and often contain many of the 20 different kinds.  Short chains of amino acids are called   peptides.  Amino Acids and Peptides Contribute Flavor   Three aspects of amino acids are  especially important to the cook. First, amino acids participate in the browning  reactions that generate flavor at high cooking temperatures (p. 778). Second, many  single amino acids and short peptides have tastes of their own, and in foods where  proteins have been partly broken down — aged cheeses, cured hams, soy sauce —  these tastes can contribute to the overall flavor. Most tasty amino acids are either
sweet or bitter to some degree, and a number of peptides are also bitter. But  glutamic   acid,   better   known   in   its   concentrated   commercial   form   MSG  (monosodium   glutamate),   and   some   peptides   have   a   unique   taste   that   is  designated by such words as   savory, brothy,   and   umami   (Japanese for “delicious”).  They lend an added dimension of flavor to foods that are rich in them, including  tomatoes and certain seaweeds as well as salt-cured and fermented products.  When heated, sulfur-containing amino acids break down and contribute eggy,  meaty aroma notes.  Amino Acids Influence Protein Behavior   The third important characteristic of  amino acids is that they have a variety of chemical natures, and these influence the  structure and behavior of the protein they’re a part of. Some amino acids have  portions resembling water and can form hydrogen bonds with other molecules,  including water. Some have short carbon chains or carbon rings that resemble fats,  and can form van der Waals bonds with other similar molecules. And some,  especially those that include a sulfur atom, are especially reactive, and can form  strong covalent bonds with other molecules, including other sulfur-containing  amino acids. This means that a single protein has many different chemical  environments along its chain: parts that attract water molecules, parts that avoid  water molecules, and parts that are ready to form strong bonds with similar parts  on other proteins, or on other parts of the same protein.
Amino acids and proteins, denaturation and coagulation. Top: Three of the 20-odd  amino acids important in food. Each amino acid has a common end including an  amino (NH 2 ) group, by which amino acids bond to each other into long chains called  proteins, and a variable end or “side group” that can form different kinds of bonds with  other amino acids. Center: A chain of amino acids shown schematically, with some of  the side groups projecting from the chain. The amino acid chain can fold back on itself,  and some of the side groups form bonds with each other to hold the chain in a folded  shape. Bottom: Heating and other cooking processes can break the fold-stabilizing  bonds and cause the long chains to unfold, or denature (left, center) . Eventually the  exposed side groups form new bonds between different protein chains, and the  proteins coagulate , or form a permanently bonded solid mass (right) .  Protein Structure  Proteins are formed by linking the amine nitrogen of one amino acid with a carbon  atom on another amino acid, and then repeating this “peptide bond” to make a
chain dozens or hundreds of amino acids long. The carbon-nitrogen backbone of  the protein molecule forms a sort of zigzag pattern, with the “side groups” — the  other atoms on each amino acid — sticking out to the sides.  The Protein Helix   One effect of the peptide bond is a certain kind of regularity  that causes the molecule as a whole to twist and form a spiral, or helix. Very few  proteins exist as a simple regular helix, but those that do tend to join together in  strong fibers. These include connective-tissue collagen in meat, an important  factor in its tenderness, and the source of gelatin (pp. 130, 597).  Protein Folds   The other influence on protein structure is the side groups of its  amino acids. Because the protein chain is so long, it can bend back on itself and  bring together amino acids that are some distance along the chain from each  other. Amino acids with similar side groups can then bond to each other in various  ways, including via hydrogen bonds, van der Waals bonds, ionic bonds (p. 813),  and strong covalent bonds (especially between sulfur atoms). This bonding is what  gives a particular protein molecule the characteristic shape that allows it to carry  out   its   particular   job.   The   weak,   temporary   nature   of   the   hydrogen   and  hydrophobic bonds allows it to change its shape as it works. The overall shape of a  protein can range from a long, extended, mostly helical molecule with a few kinks  or loops, to compact, elaborately folded molecules that are called “globular”  proteins. Collagen is an example of a helical protein, and the various proteins in  eggs are mainly globular.  Proteins in Water  In living systems and in most foods, protein molecules are surrounded by water.  Because all proteins are capable to some extent of hydrogen bonding, they absorb  and hold at least some water, although the amounts vary greatly according to the  kinds of side groups present and the overall structure of the molecule. Water  molecules can be held “inside” the protein, along the backbone, and “outside,” on  polar side groups.  Whether or not a protein is   soluble   in water depends on the strength of the bonds  between molecules, and on whether water can separate the molecules from each  other by hydrogen bonding. The wheat proteins that form gluten when flour is  mixed with water are a kind of protein that absorbs considerable amounts of water  but doesn’t dissolve, because many fat-like groups along their molecules bond
with each other, hold the proteins together, and exclude water. Similarly, the  proteins that make up the contracting muscle fibers in meat are held together by  ionic and other bonds. On the other hand, many of the proteins in milk and eggs  are quite soluble.  Protein Denaturation  A very important characteristic of proteins is their susceptibility to   denaturation,   or  the undoing of their natural structure by chemical or physical means. This change  involves breaking the bonds that maintain the molecule’s folded shape. (The  strong backbone bonds are broken only in extreme conditions or with the help of  enzymes.) Denaturation is not a change in composition, only a change in structure.  But structure determines behavior, and denatured proteins behave very differently  from their originals.  Proteins can be denatured in many ways: by exposing them to heat — usually to  somewhere between 140–180ºF/60–80ºC — or to high acidity, or to air bubbles, or  to a combination of these. In each case, the unusual chemical or physical  conditions — increased molecular agitation, or lots of reactive protons, or the  drastic difference between the air bubble and the liquid wall that surrounds it —  breaks many of the bonds between amino acid side groups that hold the protein  molecule in its specific folded shape. The long proteins therefore unfold, exposing  many more of their reactive side groups to the watery environment.  Protein Coagulation   There are several general consequences of denaturation that  follow for most food proteins. Because the molecules have been extended in  length, they’re more likely to bump into each other. And because their side groups  are now exposed and available for forming bonds, denatured proteins begin to  bond with each other, or   coagulate.   This happens throughout the food, and results  in the development of a continuous network of proteins, with water held in the  pockets between protein strands. The food therefore develops a kind of thickness  or density that can be delicate and delightful, as in a barely set custard or perfectly  cooked piece of fish. However, if cooking or other denaturing conditions continue,  given the extreme physical or chemical environment that caused the proteins to  denature in the first place, only the stronger bonds can form and survive, which  means that the proteins bond together more and more tightly, densely, and  irreversibly. And as they do so, they squeeze the pockets of water out from
between them. The custard gets dense and a watery fluid separates from the solid  portion; the fish gets tough and dry.  The details of protein denaturation and coagulation in any given food are intricate  and fascinating. For example, acidity and salts can cause egg proteins to cluster  together even before they begin to unfold, and thus affect the consistency of  scrambled eggs and custards. Such details are noted in the descriptions of  particular foods.  Enzymes  There’s a particular group of proteins that are important to the cook not so much  for their direct contribution to food texture and consistency, but for the way they  change the other components of the food they’re in. These proteins are the  enzymes.   Enzymes are biological catalysts: that is, they increase the rate of specific  chemical reactions that otherwise would occur only very slowly, if at all. Enzymes  thus cause chemical change. Some enzymes build molecules up, or modify them;  some break molecules down. Human digestive enzymes, for example, break  proteins into individual amino acids, and starch into individual glucose units. A  singe enzyme molecule can catalyze as many as a million reactions per second.  Enzymes matter to the cook because foods contain enzymes that once did  important work for the plant or animal when it was alive, but that can now harm  the food by changing its color, texture, taste, or nutritiousness. Enzymes help turn  green chlorophyll in vegetables dull olive, cause cut fruits to turn brown and  oxidize their vitamin C, and turn fish flesh mushy. And bacterial spoilage is largely a  matter of bacterial enzymes breaking the food down for the bacteria’s own use.  With a few exceptions — the tenderizing of meat by its own internal enzymes, the  firming of some vegetables before further cooking, and fermentations in general  — the cook wants to prevent enzymatic activity in food. Storing foods at low  temperatures delays spoilage in part because it slows the growth of spoilage  microbes, but also because it slows the activity of the food’s own enzymes.  Cooking Accelerates Enzyme Action Before Stopping It   Because the activity of  an enzyme depends on its structure, any change in that structure will destroy its  effectiveness. So cooking foods sufficiently will denature and inactivate any  enzymes they may contain. One vivid example of this principle is the behavior of  raw and cooked pineapple in gelatin. Pineapples and certain other fruits contain
an enzyme that breaks proteins down into small fragments. If raw pineapple is  combined with gelatin to make a jelly, the enzyme digests the gelatin molecules  and liquifies the jelly. But canned pineapple has been heated enough to denature  the enzyme, and makes a firm gelatin jelly.  There’s a complication, though. The reactivity of most chemicals increases with  increasing temperature. The rule of thumb is that reactivity doubles with each rise  of 20ºF/10ºC. The same tendency goes for enzymes, up to a range in which they  begin to denature, become less effective, and finally become completely inactive.  This means that cooking gives enzymes a chance to do their damage more and  more quickly as the temperature rises, and only stops them once they reach their  denaturation temperature. In general, the best rule is to heat foods as rapidly as  possible, thereby minimizing the period during which the enzymes are at their  optimum temperatures, and to get them all the way to the boiling point.  Conversely, desirable enzyme action — meat tenderizing, for example — can be  maximized by slow, gradual heating to denaturing temperatures.  Object 15
A Chemistry Primer: Atoms, Molecules,  Energy  Cooking is applied chemistry, and the basic concepts of chemistry — molecules,  energy, heat, reactions — are keys to a clearer understanding of what our foods are  and how we transform them. A casual acquaintance with these concepts is enough  to follow most of the explanations in this book. For readers who’d like to get to  know them better, here’s a brief review.  Atoms, Molecules, and Chemical Bonds  It was the ancient Greeks who gave us the idea of   atoms,   fundamental and invisibly  small particles of matter, and also the word   atom,   which means “uncuttable,”  “indivisible.” Greek philosophers proposed that there are just four basic kinds of  particles in the world — atoms of earth, air, water, and fire — and that all material  things, our bodies and our foods and everything else, are built from these primary  particles.   The   modern   scientific   view   of   matter’s   invisible   innards   is   more  complicated, but also more precise and illuminating.  Atoms and Molecules  All matter on earth is a mixture of around 100 pure substances, which we call the  elements : hydrogen, oxygen, nitrogen, carbon, and so on. An atom is the smallest  particle into which an element can be subdivided without losing its characteristic  properties. Atoms are very small indeed: several million would fit into the period at  the end of this sentence. All atoms are made up of smaller “subatomic” particles,  electrons, protons,   and   neutrons.   The different properties of the elements arise from  the varying combinations of subatomic particles that make up their atoms, and in  particular their quotas of protons and electrons. Hydrogen atoms contain one  proton and one electron; oxygen carries 8 of each, and iron 26.  When two or more atoms bond together, which they do by sharing electrons with  each other, they form a   molecule   (from the Latin for “mass,”   “bulk”). The molecule is  to a chemical compound what the atom is to an element: the smallest unit that
retains the properties of the original material. Most matter on earth, including  food, is a mixture of different chemical compounds.  Protons and Electrons Carry Positive and Negative Electrical Charges   There’s  one primary driving force behind all the chemical activity that makes life and  cooking   possible,   and   that’s   the   electrical   attraction   between   protons   and  electrons. Protons carry a positive electrical charge, and electrons an exactly  balancing negative charge. (The neutral neutron carries no charge.) Opposite  electrical charges attract each other; similar electrical charges repel each other. In  each atom, protons in the central nucleus attract a cloud of electrons that orbit  constantly at various distances from the nucleus. Stable forms of the elements are  electrically neutral, which means that their atoms contain equal numbers of  protons and electrons.  (If like charges repel each other and opposite charges attract, then why is it that  the protons in the nucleus don’t push each other away and the orbiting electrons  fall straight into the nucleus? It turns out that there are forces besides electricity at  work in the atom. The protons and neutrons are bound together by very strong  nuclear forces, while it’s the nature of electrons to be in continual motion. So  protons and electrons are always attracted to each other and move in response to  the other’s presence, but they never consummate their attraction.)  An atom of carbon. Carbon has six protons and six neutrons in its nucleus, and six  electrons orbiting around the nucleus.
Electrical Imbalance, Reactions, and Oxidation  The electrons in atoms are arranged around the nucleus in orbits that determine  how strongly any particular electron is held there. Some electrons are held close  and tightly to the nucleus, while others range far away and are held more weakly.  The behavior of the outermost electrons largely determines the chemical behavior  of the elements. For example, the elements classi-fied as metals — copper,  aluminum, iron — hold their outermost electrons very weakly, and easily give  them away to the atoms of other elements — oxygen, chlorine — that are  hungrier for electrons, and that tend to grab up any that are loosely held. This  imbalance in electrical pulls among different elements is the basis of most  chemical reactions.   Reactions are encounters among atoms and molecules that  result in the loss, gain, or sharing of electrons, and thus changes in the properties  of the atoms and molecules involved.  Of all the electron-grabbing elements, the most important is oxygen, so much so  that chemists use the term   oxidation   to name the general chemical activity of  grabbing electrons from other atoms, even if a chlorine atom is doing the  grabbing. Oxidation is very important in the kitchen, because oxygen is always  present in the air, and readily robs electrons from the carbon-hydrogen chains of  fats, oils, and aroma molecules. This initial oxidation triggers a cascade of further  oxidations and other reactions that end up breaking the original large fat  molecules into small, strong-smelling fragments.   Antioxidant   substances — for  example, phenolic compounds found in many foods made from plants — prevent  this breakdown by giving oxygen the electrons it wants without starting a reaction  cascade, thus sparing the fat molecules from oxidation.  Electrical Imbalance and Chemical Bonds  Electron hunger is also the basis for the   chemical bond,   an interaction between  atoms   or   molecules   that   holds   them   together,   either   loosely   or   tightly,  momentarily or indefinitely. There are several different kinds of chemical bonds  that are important in the kitchen, as they are throughout nature.  Ionic Bonds; Salt   One kind of chemical bond is the   ionic bond,   in which one atom  completely captures the electron(s) of another, so great is the difference between  their electron hungers. Chemical compounds held together by ionic bonds don’t  simply dissolve in water; they come apart into separate   ions,   or atoms that are
electrically charged because they either carry extra electrons or gave up some of  their electrons. (The term was coined by the pioneer of electricity, Michael Faraday,  from the Greek word for “going,” to name those electrically charged particles that  move when an electrical field is set up in a water solution.) Salt, our most common  seasoning, is a compound of sodium and chlorine held together with ionic bonds.  In a solid crystal of pure salt, positively charged sodium ions alternate with  negatively charged chloride ions, the sodiums having lost their electrons to the  chlorines. Because several positive sodium ions are always in a state of attraction to  several negative chloride ions, we can’t really speak of individual molecules of salt,  with one particular sodium atom bonded to a particular chlorine atom. In water,  salt dissolves into separate positive sodium ions and negative chloride ions.  Ionic and covalent bonds. Left: An ionic bond results when an atom completely  captures one or more electrons of another atom, and the two atoms experience an  attractive force (dotted line) due to their opposite electrical charges. Right: In the  covalent bond, atoms share electrons, and thereby form stable combinations called  molecules.  Strong Bonds That Make Molecules   A second kind of chemical bond, called  covalent   (from the Latin, “of equal power”), produces stable   molecules.   When two  atoms have roughly similar affinities for electrons, they will   share   them rather than  gain or lose them entirely. In order for sharing to occur, the electron clouds of two  atoms must overlap, and this condition results in a fixed arrangement in space  between two particular atoms, which thus form a stable combined structure. The  bonding geometry determines the overall shape of the molecule, and molecular  shape in turn defines the ways in which one molecule can react with others.
The elements most important to life on earth — hydrogen, oxygen, carbon,  nitrogen, phosphorus, sulfur — all tend to form covalent bonds, and these make  possible the complex, stable assemblages that constitute our bodies and our  foods. The most familiar pure chemical compounds in the kitchen are water, a  covalent combination of two hydrogen atoms and an oxygen; and sucrose, or table  sugar, a combination of carbon, oxygen, and hydrogen atoms. Covalent bonds are  generally strong and stable at room temperature: that is, they’re not broken in  significant numbers unless subjected to heat or to reactive chemicals, including  enzymes. Unlike salt, which dissolves into electrically charged ions, covalently  bonded molecules that can dissolve in water generally do so as intact, electrically  neutral molecules.  Weak Bonds Between Polar Molecules: Water   A third kind of chemical bond,  about a tenth as strong and stable as covalent bonds, is the   hydrogen   bond. The  hydrogen bond is one of several “weak” bonds that do not form molecules, but do  make temporary links between different molecules, or between different parts of  one large molecule. Weak bonds come about because most covalent bonds leave  at least a slight electrical imbalance among the participating atoms. Consider  water, whose chemical formula is H 2 O. The oxygen atom has a greater hunger for  electrons than the two hydrogen atoms, and so the shared electrons are held  closer to the oxygen than to the hydrogens. As a result, there’s an overall negative  charge in the vicinity of the oxygen, and an overall positive charge around the  hydrogen atoms. This unequal distribution of charge, together with the geometry  of the covalent bonds, results in a molecule with a positive end and a negative  end. Such a molecule is called   polar   because it has two separate centers, or poles,  of charge.  A hydrogen bond results from the attraction between oppositely charged ends of  polar molecules (or portions of molecules). This kind of bond is important because  it’s very common in materials that contain water, because it brings different kinds  of molecules into close association, and because it’s weak enough that these  molecular associations can change rapidly at room temperature. Many of the  chemical interactions in plant and animal cells occur via hydrogen bonds.  Very Weak Bonds Between Nonpolar Molecules: Fats and Oils   A fourth kind of  chemical bond is very weak indeed, between a hundredth and a ten-thousandth  as strong as a molecule-making covalent bond. These   van der Waals   bonds, named  after the Dutch chemist who first described them, are the kind of flickering
electrical attraction that even nonpolar molecules can feel for each other, thanks to  brief fluctuations in their structures. Where electrically polar water is held together  as a liquid by hydrogen bonds, nonpolar fat molecules are held together as a liquid  and given their appealingly thick consistency by van der Waals bonds. Though  these bonds are indeed weak, their effect can add up to a significant force: fat  molecules are long chains and include dozens of carbon atoms, so each fat  molecule can interact with many more other molecules than a small water  molecule can.  Energy  Energy Causes Change  The paragraphs directly above describe various bonds as “weak” and “strong,” easily  or not so easily formed and broken. The idea of bond strength is useful because  most cooking is a matter of the systematic breaking of certain chemical bonds and  the formation of others. The key to the behavior of chemical bonds is   energy.   The  word is a Greek compound of “in” and “force” or “activity,” and now has as its  standard definition “the capacity for doing work,” or “the exertion of a force across a  distance.” Most simply, energy is that property of physical systems that makes  possible   change.   A system with little energy is largely unchanging. Conversely, the  more energy available to an object, the more likely that object is to be changed, or  to change its surroundings. Our kitchens are organized around this principle.  Stoves and ovens change the qualities of food by pouring heat energy into it, while  the refrigerator preserves food by removing heat and thus slowing down the  chemical changes that constitute spoilage.  Atoms and molecules can absorb or release energy in several different forms, two  of which are important in the kitchen.  The Nature of Heat: Molecular Movement  One kind of energy is the energy of motion, or   kinetic energy.   Atoms and molecules  can move from one place to another; or spin in place, or vibrate, and all of these  changes in position or orientation require energy.   Heat   is a manifestation of a  material’s kinetic energy, and   temperature   is a measure of that energy: the higher  the temperature of a food or pan, the hotter it is, the faster its molecules are
moving and colliding with each other. And simple movement is the key to  transforming molecules and foods. As molecules move faster and more forcefully,  their motions and collisions begin to overcome the electrical forces holding them  together. This frees some atoms to find new partners and rearrange themselves in  new molecules. Heat thus encourages chemical reactions and chemical change.  Bond Energy  The second kind of energy that’s important in the kitchen is the energy of the  chemical bonds that hold molecules together. When two or more atoms become a  molecule by sharing electrons and bonding with each other, they’re pulled  together by an electrical force. So in the process of forming the bond, some of their  electrical energy is transformed into energy of motion. And the stronger the  electrical force, the more rapidly they accelerate toward each other. The stronger  the bond, the more energy is released — lost — from the molecule in the form of  motion. Strong bonds, then, “contain” less energy than weak bonds. This is another  way of saying that they are more stable, less susceptible to change, than weak  bonds.  Van der Waals bonds. Thanks to fluctuations in the positions of their shared electrons,  even the nonpolar chains of carbon and hydrogen atoms in fats experience weakly  attractive electrical forces (dotted lines).  Bond strength is defined as the amount of energy released from the participating  atoms when they form the bond. This is the same as the amount of energy  required to break that bond once it’s formed. When the atoms in a molecule are  heated up so they move with the same kinetic energy that they had released when  they bonded to each other, then those bonds begin to break apart, and the  molecule begins to react and change.
The strong covalent bonds typical of our major food molecules — proteins,  carbohydrates, fats — are broken by about 100 times the average kinetic energy of  molecules at room temperature. This means that they break very rarely at room  temperature, and don’t change at a significant rate until we heat them. The weaker,  temporary hydrogen and van der Waals bonds   between   molecules are constantly  being broken and re-formed at room temperature, and this welter of activity  increases as the temperature rises. This is why fats melt and become thinner in  consistency as we heat them: the energy of their motion increasingly overpowers  the forces attracting them to each other.  The Phases of Matter  In our everyday life, we encounter matter in three different states, or   phases   (the  word comes from the Greek for “appearance” or “manifestation”). These states are  the solid phase, the liquid phase, and the gas phase. The temperatures at which a  material melts — changes from solid to liquid — and boils — changes from liquid  to gas — are determined by the bonding forces among the atoms or molecules.  The stronger the bonds, the more energy needed to overcome them, and so the  higher the temperature at which the material shifts from one phase to another.  During that shift, all the heat added to the material goes into completing the  phase change. The temperature of a solid-liquid mix will remain fairly constant  until all the solid has melted. Similarly, the temperature of a pot of boiling water on  a high flame remains constant — at the boiling point — until all the liquid water  has been turned into steam.  Solids  At low temperatures, atomic motion is limited to rotation and vibration, and the  immobilized atoms or molecules bond tightly to each other in solid, closely  packed, well-defined structures. Such structures define the solid phase. In a  crystalline solid — salt, sugar, tempered chocolate — the particles are arranged in  a regular, repeating array, while in amorphous solids — boiled candies, glass —  they are randomly oriented. Large, irregular molecules like proteins and starch  often form both highly ordered, crystalline regions and disordered amorphous  regions in the same chunk of material. Ionic bonds, hydrogen bonds, and van der  Waals bonds may be involved in holding the particles of a solid together.
States of matter. Crystalline solids such as salt and sugar are made up of atoms or  molecules bonded together in highly ordered, regular arrays. Amorphous solids, such  as hard candies and glass, are masses of atoms or molecules that have bonded to each  other in a random arrangement. Liquids are a loosely bonded, fluid mass of atoms or  molecules, while a gas is a fluid and dispersed group of atoms or molecules.  Liquids  At a temperature that is characteristic of each solid substance, the rotation and  vibration of individual molecules in that substance becomes forceful enough that  the electrical forces holding them in place are overpowered. The fixed structure  then breaks up, leaving the molecules free to move from one place to another.  However, most of the molecules are still moving slowly enough that they remain  influenced by the forces that once immobilized them, and so they remain loosely  associated with each other. They’re free to move, but move together. This fluid but  cohesive phase is a   liquid.  Gases  If the temperature continues to rise and the molecules move with a kinetic energy  high enough that they can break away from each other’s influence completely and  move freely into the air, the substance become a different kind of fluid, a   gas.   The  most familiar transition from the liquid phase to the gas phase is boiling, in which
we transform liquid water into bubbles of water vapor, or steam. Less obvious to  the eye, because it’s so gradual, is the evaporation of water at temperatures below  the boiling point. The molecules in a liquid move with a wide range of kinetic  energies, and a small portion of the molecules in room-temperature water are  moving fast enough to escape from the surface and move into the air.  In fact, water molecules can even escape as a gas from solid ice! This direct  transformation of a solid into a gas is called   sublimation,   and is the cause of that  deterioration   in   foods   known   as “freezer   burn,” in   which   crystalline   water  evaporates into the freezer’s cold, dry air. Freeze-drying is a controlled version of  the same process.  Many Food Molecules Can’t Change Phase  Most of the molecules that the cook works with can’t simply change from one  phase to another when heated. Instead, they react to form entirely different kinds  of molecules. This is because food molecules are large, and form so many weak  bonds between molecules that they’re in fact held very strongly together. It takes  as much energy to break them apart from each other as it does to break the  molecules themselves apart: and so rather than melting or evaporating, the  molecules become transformed. For example, sugar will melt from a solid into a  liquid, but rather than then vaporize into a gas as water does, it breaks apart and  forms hundreds of new compounds: a process we call caramelization. Fats and oils  melt, but break down and smoke before they begin to boil. Starch, which is a long  chain of sugar molecules joined together, won’t even melt: it and proteins, also  very large molecules, begin to break down as solids.  Mixtures of Phases: Solutions, Suspensions, Emulsions, Gels,  Foams  Cooks seldom deal with pure chemical compounds or even single phases. Foods  are mixtures of different molecules, different phases, and even different kinds of  mixtures! Here are brief definitions of mixtures that are important in the kitchen.  •   A   solution   is a material in which individual ions or molecules are dispersed in  a liquid. Salt brines and sugar syrups are simple culinary examples.  •   A   suspension   is a material in which a substance is dispersed in a liquid in
clusters   or   particles   consisting   of   many   molecules.   Nonfat   milk   is   a  suspension of milk-protein particles in water. Suspensions are usually cloudy  because the clusters are large enough to deflect light rays (individual  dissolved molecules are too small to do so, so solutions are clear). •An  emulsion   is a special kind of suspension, one in which the dispersed  substance is a liquid that can’t mix evenly with the containing liquid. Cream  is an emulsion of butterfat in water, and an oil-and-vinegar dressing is  usually an emulsion of vinegar in oil.  •   A   gel   is a dispersion of water in a solid: the molecules of the solid form a  sponge-like network, and the pockets of water are trapped in the network.  Examples are savory or sweet jellies made with gelatin, and fruit jellies made  with pectin.  •   A   foam   is a dispersion of gas bubbles in a liquid or solid. Soufflés, bread, and  the head on a glass of beer are all foams.  Object 16
